=== PAGE 1 ===
ARD
BO O F E DUC 
Adopted by the 
of Education History–Social Science 
for California 
Public Schools 
California State Board 
October, 1998 Content Standards 
Kindergarten Through 
Grade Twelve 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 2 ===
iiSTATE 
O F C ALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT O F EDUCATION 
Publishing Information
 
When the History–Social Science Content Standards for California Public Schools, 
Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve was adopted by the California State Board of Education 
on October 9, 1998, the members of the State Board were the following: Yvonne W. Larsen, President; Robert L. Trigg, Vice-President; Marian Bergeson; Timothy C. Draper; Kathryn Dronenburg; Marion Joseph; Marion McDowell; Janet G. Nicholas; Gerti B. Thomas; Marina Tse; and Richard Weston. 
This publication was edited by Bob Klingensmith, working in cooperation with Greg Geeting, 
Executive Director, and Gregory F. McGinity, Education Policy Consultant, State Board of Education. It was designed and prepared for printing by the staff of CDE Press, with the cover and interior design created and prepared by Cheryl McDonald. Typesetting was done by Jamie Contreras. It was published by the Department of Education, 721 Capitol Mall, Sacramento, California (mailing address: P.O. Box 944272, Sacramento, CA 94244-2720). It was distributed under the provisions of the Library Distribution Act and Government Code  Section 
11096. 
© 2000 by the California Department of Education 
All rights reserved 
ISBN 0-8011-1488-8 
Special Acknowledgment 
The State Board of Education extends its appreciation to the members and staff of the 
Commission for the Establishment of Academic Content and Performance Standards (Academic Standards Commission) for their outstanding work in developing and recommending the history–social science content standards to the State Board of Education under the provisions of Education Code  Section 60605. 
The members and executive staff of the Academic Standards Commission at the time of the approval of the draft history–social science content standards were the following: 
Ellen Wright, Chair*; Robert Calfee, Vice-Chair*; Mike Aiello; Joseph Carrabino; Judy 
Codding*; Daniel Condron; Linda Davis; Bill Evers; Tony Fisher; Jerilyn Harris; Dorothy Jue Lee; Mark Ortiz; Judith Panton*; Raymund Paredes*; Alice Petrossian*; Glenn T. Seaborg; Kate Simpson*; Lawrence Siskind*; Jerry Treadway*; LaTanya Wright*; Delaine Eastin, State Superintendent of Public Instruction; Sonia Hernandez, the Superintendent’s Designee; Scott Hill, Executive Director; Sheila Byrd, Deputy Executive Director; Sue Pimentel, Senior Standards Advisor; and Ellen Clark, Consultant. 
Note: The asterisk (*) identifies those members who served on the Academic Standards 
Commission’s History–Social Science Committee. Special commendation is also extended to the leadership of Lawrence Siskind, Chair of the 
Academic Standards Commission’s History–Social Science Committee; State Board of Education member Marion McDowell; Kirk Ankeney, Chair of the Curriculum Development and Supplemental Materials Commission; and Tom Adams, Consultant, Curriculum Frameworks and Instructional Resources Office, whose significant contributions to this document deserve special recognition. 
Ordering Information 
Copies of this publication are available for $9 each, plus shipping and handling charges. California residents are charged sales tax. Orders may be sent to CDE Press, Sales Office, California Department of Education, P.O. Box 271, Sacramento, CA 95812-0271; FAX (916) 323-0823. See page 63 for a partial list of other educational resources available from the Department. In addition, an illustrated Educational Resources Catalog describing publications, 
videos, and other instructional media available from the Department can be obtained without charge by writing to the address given above or by calling the Sales Office at (916) 445-1260. 
Notice 
The guidance in History–Social Science Content Standards for California Public Schools is not 
binding on local educational agencies or other entities. Except for the statutes, regulations, and court decisions that are referenced herein, the document is exemplary, and compliance with it 
Prepared for publicationis not mandatory. (See Education Code Section 33308.5.) by CSEA members. 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 3 ===
Contents 
A Message from the State Board of Education and the State Superintendent
 
of Public Instruction ............................................................................................................................ iv
 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... v
 
Kindergarten Through Grade Five 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills ................................................................................... 1
 
Kindergarten: Learning and Working Now and Long Ago ........................................................... 3
 
Grade One: A Child’s Place in Time and Space ................................................................................ 5
 
Grade Two: People Who Make a Difference ..................................................................................... 7
 
Grade Three: Continuity and Change ................................................................................................ 9
 
Grade Four: California: A Changing State ...................................................................................... 12
 
Grade Five: United States History and Geography: Making a New Nation .............................. 16
 
Grades Six Through Eight 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills ................................................................................. 21
 
Grade Six: World History and Geography: Ancient Civilizations ............................................... 23
 
Grade Seven: World History and Geography: Medieval and Early Modern Times ................. 27
 
Grade Eight: United States History and Geography: Growth and Conflict ............................... 33
 
Grades Nine Through Twelve 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills ................................................................................. 40
 
Grade Ten: World History, Culture, and Geography: The Modern World ................................ 42
 
Grade Eleven: United States History and Geography: Continuity and Change in
 
the Twentieth Century ................................................................................................................... 47
 
Grade Twelve: Principles of American Democracy and Economics ........................................... 54
 
iii 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 4 ===
A Message from the State Board of Education and the 
State Superintendent of Public Instruction 
Seventeen years ago the report A Nation at 
Risk, by the National Commission on Excellence 
in Education (1983), brought squarely to our attention a “rising tide of mediocrity” in our 
schools. An era of education reform began. The 
results were somewhat uneven. The reform movement did stimulate important infrastructure 
improvements: instructional time was increased, 
high school diplomas came to signify the comple­tion of minimum course requirements, and 
emphasis was placed on local planning efforts to 
improve the schools’ efficiency and effectiveness. A shortcoming of the movement up to this point 
has been the lack of focus on rigorous academic 
standards. The desire to improve student achievement guided the effort, but it lacked a 
comprehensive, specific vision of what students 
actually needed to know and be able to do. 
Standards are a bold initiative. 
With the adoption of content standards, 
California is going beyond reform.  We are redefin­
ing the state’s role in public education. For the 
first time, we are stating—explicitly—the content 
that students need to acquire at each grade level from kindergarten to grade twelve. These stan­
dards are rigorous. With student mastery of this 
content, California schools will be on a par with those in the best educational systems in other 
states and nations. The content is attainable by all 
students, given sufficient time, except for those few who have severe disabilities. We regard the 
standards as firm but not unyielding; they will be 
modified in future years to reflect new research and scholarship. 
Standards describe what to teach, 
not how to teach it. 
Standards-based education maintains 
California’s tradition of respect for local control of schools. To help students achieve at high levels, local school officials and teachers—with the full support and cooperation of families, 
businesses, and community partners—are 
encouraged to take these standards and design the specific curricular and instructional strategies 
that best deliver the content to their students. 
Standards are an enduring commitment, 
not a passing fancy. 
Every initiative in public education, especially 
one so bold as establishing high standards, has 
its skeptics. “Just wait a while,” they say, “stan­
dards, too, will pass.” We intend to prove the 
skeptics wrong, and we intend to do that by completely aligning state efforts to these stan­
dards, including the statewide testing program, 
curriculum frameworks, instructional materials, professional development, preservice education, 
and compliance review. We will see a generation 
of educators who think of standards not as a new 
layer  but as the foundation itself. 
Standards are our commitment to excellence. 
Fifteen years from now, we are convinced, the 
adoption of standards will be viewed as the 
signal event that began a “rising tide of excel­
lence” in our schools. No more will the critical question What should my child be learning? be met 
with uncertainty of knowledge, purpose, or resolve. These standards answer the question. They are comprehensive and specific. They 
represent our commitment to excellence. 
YVONNE W. LARSEN, President 
California State Board of Education 
DELAINE EASTIN 
State Superintendent of Public Instruction 
iv 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 5 ===
Introduction 
The California State Board of Education 
has worked hard with the Academic Stan­
dards Commission to develop history– 
social science standards that reflect California’s commitment to history–social 
science education. These standards empha­
size historical narrative, highlight the roles of significant individuals throughout 
history, and convey the rights and obliga­
tions of citizenship. 
In that spirit the standards proceed 
chronologically and call attention to the story of America as a noble experiment in a constitutional republic. They recognize that 
America’s ongoing struggle to realize the 
ideals of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution is the struggle to 
maintain our beautifully complex national 
heritage of e pluribus unum. While the 
standards emphasize Western civilizations 
as the source of American political institu­
tions, laws, and ideology, they also expect students to analyze the changing political 
relationships within and among other 
countries and regions of the world, both throughout history and within the context 
of contemporary global interdependence. 
The standards serve as the basis for 
statewide assessments, curriculum frame­works, and instructional materials, but 
methods of instructional delivery remain the responsibility of local educators. Development of the Standards 
The recommended history–social science 
standards build on the work of exemplary 
documents from both within and outside 
California, most notably the History–Social 
Science Framework for California Public 
Schools, a document strengthened by the 
consensus that elicited it and nationally 
recognized for its emphasis on historical 
events presented within a chronological and 
geographic context. 
The standards reflect guidance and input 
from countless members of the California teaching community and other citizens who attended the meetings of the State Board 
and Standards Commission. Their input 
contributed substantively to the discussions and the drafts, as did the input gathered 
from the nine directed community input 
meetings hosted by the Standards Commis­sion throughout the state in January 1998 
and from the five field hearings held by the 
State Board throughout the state in August 1998. At those forums, parents, teachers, 
administrators, and business and commu­
nity leaders helped define key issues. Current practice and the state of history– 
social science instruction in California were 
also given special consideration during the process. In addition, history–social science 
experts from around the nation reviewed 
v 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 6 ===
vi INTRODUCTION 
and submitted formal comments on the first 
and second drafts. The more than 70 re­
viewers included eminent historians, geog­
raphers, economists, and political scientists. Their input helped immeasurably to 
strengthen the rigor and quality of the 
standards. 
Highlights of the Standards 
With the History–Social Science Framework 
for California Public Schools  as a guide to the 
eras and civilizations to study, these stan­dards require students not only to acquire core knowledge in history and social sci­
ence, but also to develop the critical think­
ing skills that historians and social scientists employ to study the past and its relation­
ship to the present. It is possible to spend a 
lifetime studying history and not learn about every significant historical event; no 
one can know everything. However, the 
State Board hopes that during their years of formal schooling, students will learn to 
distinguish the important from the unim­
portant, to recognize vital connections between the present and the past, and to 
appreciate universal historical themes and 
dilemmas. 
Throughout this document, the use of 
biographies, original documents, diaries, letters, legends, speeches, and other narra­tive artifacts from our past is encouraged to 
foster students’ understanding of historical 
events by revealing the ideas, values, fears, and dreams of the people associated with 
them. Found in archives, museums, histori­
cal sites, and libraries across California, these original materials are indispensable 
resources. The State Board hopes schools 
will take advantage of these repositories and encourage students’ direct contact with 
history. The standards also emphasize the importance of enriching the study of history through the use of literature, both from and 
about the period being studied. 
Mastery of these standards will ensure 
that students not only know the facts, but also understand common and complex themes throughout history, making connec­
tions among their own lives, the lives of the 
people who came before them, and the lives of those to come. The statements at the 
beginning of each grade provide a brief 
overview of the greater story under study. The overarching statements in each grade 
and their substatements function as concep­
tual units: the numbered items under each overarching standard delineate aspects of 
the bigger concept that students are ex­
pected to master. In this way, teachers and assessors can focus on the concept without 
neglecting the essential components of each. 
The standards include many exemplary 
lists of historical figures that could be studied. These examples are illustrative. 
They do not suggest that all of the figures mentioned are required for study, nor do 
they exclude the study of additional figures 
that may be relevant to the standards. 
The standards do not exist in isolation. 
The History–Social Science Framework will be 
revised to align with the standards, and it will include suggested ways to relate the 
standards’ substance to students, ways to 
make connections within and across grades, and detailed guidance for day-to-day 
instruction and lesson plans. Teachers 
should use these documents together. 
Knowledge and skills increase in com­
plexity in a systematic fashion from kinder­garten through grade twelve, although no standards exist for grade nine in deference 
to current California practice in which 
grade nine is the year students traditionally choose a history–social science elective. 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 7 ===
INTRODUCTION vii 
However, in the coming years, the State 
Board intends to review this current practice. 
In kindergarten through grade three, 
students are introduced to the basic concepts of each discipline: history, geography, civics, 
and economics. Beginning at grade four, the 
disciplines are woven together within the standards at each grade. 
The critical thinking skills that support the 
study of history–social science are outlined in the sections for grades five, eight, and ten. 
To approach subject matter as historians, geographers, economists, and political 
scientists, students are expected to employ 
these skills as they master the content. 
While the State Board recognizes that it 
will take both time and changes in policies for schools, teachers, and students to meet 
these standards, we believe it can and must be done. When students master the content 
and develop the skills contained in these 
standards, they will be well equipped for the twenty-first century. 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 8 ===
KINDERGARTEN
Grade Five Kindergarten 
Through 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills
 
The intellectual skills noted below are to be learned through, and applied to, the content 
standards for kindergarten through grade five. They are to be assessed only in conjunc­
tion with  the content standards in kindergarten through grade five. 
In addition to the standards for kindergarten through grade five, students demonstrate the following intellectual, reasoning, reflection, and research skills: 
Chronological and Spatial Thinking 
1.	 Students place key events and people of the historical era they are studying in a chrono­
logical sequence and within a spatial context; they interpret time lines.
2.	 Students correctly apply terms related to time, including past, present, future, decade,
 
century,  and generation.
 
3.	 Students explain how the present is connected to the past, identifying both similarities
and differences between the two, and how some things change over time and some things
stay the same.
4.	 Students use map and globe skills to determine the absolute locations of places and
interpret information available through a map’s or globe’s legend, scale, and symbolic
representations.
5.	 Students judge the significance of the relative location of a place (e.g., proximity to a
 
harbor, on trade routes) and analyze how relative advantages or disadvantages can
 change over time.
 
Research, Evidence, and Point of View 
1.	 Students differentiate between primary and secondary sources.
2.	 Students pose relevant questions about events they encounter in historical documents,
eyewitness accounts, oral histories, letters, diaries, artifacts, photographs, maps, artworks,
and architecture.
3.	 Students distinguish fact from fiction by comparing documentary sources on historical
figures and events with fictionalized characters and events.
1 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 9 ===
KINDERGARTEN 
Historical Interpretation 
1.	 Students summarize the key events of the era they are studying and explain the historical
contexts of those events.
2.	 Students identify the human and physical characteristics of the places they are studying
and explain how those features form the unique character of those places. 
3.	 Students identify and interpret the multiple causes and effects of historical events. 
4.	 Students conduct cost-benefit analyses of historical and current events. 
2 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 10 ===
3
Kindergarten 
Learning and Working Now and Long Ago
 
Students in kindergarten are introduced to basic spatial, temporal, and causal relation­
ships, emphasizing the geographic and historical connections between the world today and the world long ago. The stories of ordinary and extraordinary people help describe the range and continuity of human experience and introduce the concepts of courage, self-control, justice, heroism, leadership, deliberation, and individual responsibility. Historical empathy for how people lived and worked long ago reinforces the concept of civic behavior: how we interact respectfully with each other, following rules, and re­specting the rights of others. 
K.1	 Students understand that being a good citizen involves acting in certain ways. 
1.Follow rules, such as sharing and taking turns, and know the consequences of break­
ing them.
2.Learn examples of honesty, courage, determination, individual responsibility, andpatriotism in American and world history from stories and folklore.
3.Know beliefs and related behaviors of characters in stories from times past and under­
stand the consequences of the characters’ actions.
K.2 Students recognize national and state symbols and icons such as the national 
and state flags, the bald eagle, and the Statue of Liberty. 
K.3	 Students match simple descriptions of work that people do and the names 
of related jobs at the school, in the local community, and from historical ac­
counts. 
3 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 11 ===
4 KINDERGARTEN 
K.4	 Students compare and contrast the locations of people, places, and 
environments and describe their characteristics. 
1.Determine the relative locations of objects using the terms near/far, left/right, and
behind/in front.
2.Distinguish between land and water on maps and globes and locate general areas
referenced in historical legends and stories.
3.Identify traffic symbols and map symbols (e.g., those for land, water, roads, cities).
4.Construct maps and models of neighborhoods, incorporating such structures as police
and fire stations, airports, banks, hospitals, supermarkets, harbors, schools, homes,places of worship, and transportation lines.
5.Demonstrate familiarity with the school’s layout, environs, and the jobs people do
there.
K.5 Students put events in temporal order using a calendar, placing days, 
weeks, and months in proper order. 
K.6	 Students understand that history relates to events, people, and places of 
other times. 
1.Identify the purposes of, and the people and events honored in, commemorative
holidays, including the human struggles that were the basis for the events (e.g.,
Thanksgiving, Independence Day, Washington’s and Lincoln’s Birthdays, Martin
Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day).
2.Know the triumphs in American legends and historical accounts through the stories ofsuch people as Pocahontas, George Washington, Booker T. Washington, Daniel Boone,
and Benjamin Franklin.
3.Understand how people lived in earlier times and how their lives would be different
today (e.g., getting water from a well, growing food, making clothing, having fun,forming organizations, living by rules and laws).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 12 ===
5
Grade One 
A Child’s Place in Time and Space
 
Students in grade one continue a more detailed treatment of the broad concepts of 
rights and responsibilities in the contemporary world. The classroom serves as a micro­cosm of society in which decisions are made with respect for individual responsibility, for other people, and for the rules by which we all must live: fair play, good sportsman­ship, and respect for the rights and opinions of others. Students examine the geographic and economic aspects of life in their own neighborhoods and compare them to those of people long ago. Students explore the varied backgrounds of American citizens and learn about the symbols, icons, and songs that reflect our common heritage. 
1.1	 Students describe the rights and individual responsibilities of citizenship. 
1.Understand the rule-making process in a direct democracy (everyone votes on
the rules) and in a representative democracy (an elected group of people make
the rules), giving examples of both systems in their classroom, school, and
community.
2.Understand the elements of fair play and good sportsmanship, respect for therights and opinions of others, and respect for rules by which we live, including
the meaning of the “Golden Rule.”
1.2	 Students compare and contrast the absolute and relative locations of places 
and people and describe the physical and/or human characteristics of places. 
1.Locate on maps and globes their local community, California, the United States,
the seven continents, and the four oceans.
2.Compare the information that can be derived from a three-dimensional modelto the information that can be derived from a picture of the same location.
3.Construct a simple map, using cardinal directions and map symbols.
4.Describe how location, weather, and physical environment affect the way
people live, including the effects on their food, clothing, shelter, transportation,
and recreation.
5 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 13 ===
6 GRADE ONE 
1.3	 Students know and understand the symbols, icons, and traditions of the United 
States that provide continuity and a sense of community across time. 
1.Recite the Pledge of Allegiance and sing songs that express American ideals (e.g., “My
Country ’Tis of Thee”).
2.Understand the significance of our national holidays and the heroism and achieve­
ments of the people associated with them.
3.Identify American symbols, landmarks, and essential documents, such as the flag, bald
eagle, Statue of Liberty, U.S. Constitution, and Declaration of Independence, and knowthe people and events associated with them.
1.4	 Students compare and contrast everyday life in different times and places 
around the world and recognize that some aspects of people, places, and things 
change over time while others stay the same. 
1.Examine the structure of schools and communities in the past.
2.Study transportation methods of earlier days.
3.Recognize similarities and differences of earlier generations in such areas as work
(inside and outside the home), dress, manners, stories, games, and festivals, drawing
from biographies, oral histories, and folklore.
1.5	 Students describe the human characteristics of familiar places and the varied 
backgrounds of American citizens and residents in those places. 
1.Recognize the ways in which they are all part of the same community, sharing prin­ciples, goals, and traditions despite their varied ancestry; the forms of diversity in their
school and community; and the benefits and challenges of a diverse population.
2.Understand the ways in which American Indians and immigrants have helped define
Californian and American culture.
3.Compare the beliefs, customs, ceremonies, traditions, and social practices of the variedcultures, drawing from folklore.
1.6 Students understand basic economic concepts and the role of individual choice
in a free-market economy. 
1.Understand the concept of exchange and the use of money to purchase goods and
services.
2.Identify the specialized work that people do to manufacture, transport, and market
goods and services and the contributions of those who work in the home.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 14 ===
7
Grade Two 
People Who Make a Difference
 
Students in grade two explore the lives of actual people who make a difference in their 
everyday lives and learn the stories of extraordinary people from history whose achievements have touched them, directly or indirectly. The study of contemporary people who supply goods and services aids in understanding the complex interdepen­dence in our free-market system. 
2.1	 Students differentiate between things that happened long ago and things 
that happened yesterday. 
1.Trace the history of a family through the use of primary and secondary sources,
including artifacts, photographs, interviews, and documents.
2.Compare and contrast their daily lives with those of their parents, grandparents,
and/or guardians.
3.Place important events in their lives in the order in which they occurred (e.g., on a
time line or storyboard).
2.2	 Students demonstrate map skills by describing the absolute and relative loca­
tions of people, places, and environments. 
1.Locate on a simple letter-number grid system the specific locations and geographicfeatures in their neighborhood or community (e.g., map of the classroom, the school).
2.Label from memory a simple map of the North American continent, including the
countries, oceans, Great Lakes, major rivers, and mountain ranges. Identify the essen­
tial map elements: title, legend, directional indicator, scale, and date.
3.Locate on a map where their ancestors live(d), telling when the family moved to thelocal community and how and why they made the trip.
4.Compare and contrast basic land use in urban, suburban, and rural environments in
California.
7 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 15 ===
8 GRADE TWO 
2.3	 Students explain governmental institutions and practices in the United States 
and other countries. 
1.Explain how the United States and other countries make laws, carry out laws, deter­
mine whether laws have been violated, and punish wrongdoers.
2.Describe the ways in which groups and nations interact with one another to try to
resolve problems in such areas as trade, cultural contacts, treaties, diplomacy, and
military force.
2.4	 Students understand basic economic concepts and their individual roles in the 
economy and demonstrate basic economic reasoning skills. 
1.Describe food production and consumption long ago and today, including the roles of
farmers, processors, distributors, weather, and land and water resources.
2.Understand the role and interdependence of buyers (consumers) and sellers (produc­
ers) of goods and services.
3.Understand how limits on resources affect production and consumption (what toproduce and what to consume).
2.5	 Students understand the importance of individual action and character and 
explain how heroes from long ago and the recent past have made a difference in 
others’ lives (e.g., from biographies of Abraham Lincoln, Louis Pasteur, Sitting Bull, George Washington Carver, Marie Curie, Albert Einstein, Golda Meir, 
Jackie Robinson, Sally Ride). 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 16 ===
9
Grade Three 
Continuity and Change
 
Students in grade three learn more about our connections to the past and the ways in 
which particularly local, but also regional and national, government and traditions have developed and left their marks on current society, providing common memories. Em­phasis is on the physical and cultural landscape of California, including the study of American Indians, the subsequent arrival of immigrants, and the impact they have had in forming the character of our contemporary society. 
3.1	 Students describe the physical and human geography and use maps, tables, 
graphs, photographs, and charts to organize information about people, places, 
and environments in a spatial context. 
1.Identify geographical features in their local region (e.g., deserts, mountains, valleys,
hills, coastal areas, oceans, lakes).
2.Trace the ways in which people have used the resources of the local region and modi­fied the physical environment (e.g., a dam constructed upstream changed a river or
coastline).
3.2	 Students describe the American Indian nations in their local region long ago 
and in the recent past. 
1.Describe national identities, religious beliefs, customs, and various folklore
traditions.
2.Discuss the ways in which physical geography, including climate, influenced howthe local Indian nations adapted to their natural environment (e.g., how they obtained
food, clothing, tools).
3.Describe the economy and systems of government, particularly those with tribal
constitutions, and their relationship to federal and state governments.
4.Discuss the interaction of new settlers with the already established Indians of theregion.
9 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 17 ===
10 	 GRADE THREE 
3.3	 Students draw from historical and community resources to organize the se­
quence of local historical events and describe how each period of settlement left 
its mark on the land. 
1.Research the explorers who visited here, the newcomers who settled here, and the
people who continue to come to the region, including their cultural and religioustraditions and contributions.
2.Describe the economies established by settlers and their influence on the present-day
economy, with emphasis on the importance of private property and entrepreneurship.
3.Trace why their community was established, how individuals and families contributed
to its founding and development, and how the community has changed over time,drawing on maps, photographs, oral histories, letters, newspapers, and other primary
sources.
3.4	 Students understand the role of rules and laws in our daily lives and the basic 
structure of the U.S. government. 
1.Determine the reasons for rules, laws, and the U.S. Constitution; the role of citizenship
in the promotion of rules and laws; and the consequences for people who violate rules
and laws.
2.Discuss the importance of public virtue and the role of citizens, including how to
participate in a classroom, in the community, and in civic life.
3.Know the histories of important local and national landmarks, symbols, and essentialdocuments that create a sense of community among citizens and exemplify cherished
ideals (e.g., the U.S. flag, the bald eagle, the Statue of Liberty, the U.S. Constitution, the
Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Capitol).
4.Understand the three branches of government, with an emphasis on local government.
5.Describe the ways in which California, the other states, and sovereign AmericanIndian tribes contribute to the making of our nation and participate in the federal
system of government.
6.Describe the lives of American heroes who took risks to secure our freedoms (e.g.,
Anne Hutchinson, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, FrederickDouglass, Harriet Tubman, Martin Luther King, Jr.).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 18 ===
GRADE THREE 11 
3.5	 Students demonstrate basic economic reasoning skills and an understanding of 
the economy of the local region. 
1.Describe the ways in which local producers have used and are using natural resources,
human resources, and capital resources to produce goods and services in the past and
the present.
2.Understand that some goods are made locally, some elsewhere in the United States,
and some abroad.
3.Understand that individual economic choices involve trade-offs and the evaluation ofbenefits and costs.
4.Discuss the relationship of students’ “work” in school and their personal human
capital.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 19 ===
12
Grade Four 
California: A Changing State
 
Students learn the story of their home state, unique in American history in terms of its 
vast and varied geography, its many waves of immigration beginning with pre-Columbian societies, its continuous diversity, economic energy, and rapid growth. In addition to the specific treatment of milestones in California history, students examine the state in the context of the rest of the nation, with an emphasis on the U.S. Constitu­tion and the relationship between state and federal government. 
4.1	 Students demonstrate an understanding of the physical and human geographic 
features that define places and regions in California. 
1.Explain and use the coordinate grid system of latitude and longitude to determine the
absolute locations of places in California and on Earth.
2.Distinguish between the North and South Poles; the equator and the prime meridian;
the tropics; and the hemispheres, using coordinates to plot locations.
3.Identify the state capital and describe the various regions of California, including how
their characteristics and physical environments (e.g., water, landforms, vegetation,climate) affect human activity.
4.Identify the locations of the Pacific Ocean, rivers, valleys, and mountain passes and
explain their effects on the growth of towns.
5.Use maps, charts, and pictures to describe how communities in California vary in land
use, vegetation, wildlife, climate, population density, architecture, services, and trans­portation.
12 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 20 ===
GRADE FOUR 13 
4.2	 Students describe the social, political, cultural, and economic life and interactions 
among people of California from the pre-Columbian societies to the Spanish 
mission and Mexican rancho periods. 
1.	 Discuss the major nations of California Indians, including their geographic distribution,
economic activities, legends, and religious beliefs; and describe how they depended on,
adapted to, and modified the physical environment by cultivation of land and use of sea
resources.
2.	 Identify the early land and sea routes to, and European settlements in, California with a
focus on the exploration of the North Pacific (e.g., by Captain James Cook, Vitus Bering,Juan Cabrillo), noting especially the importance of mountains, deserts, ocean currents, and
wind patterns.
3.	 Describe the Spanish exploration and colonization of California, including the relationships
among soldiers, missionaries, and Indians (e.g., Juan Crespi, Junipero Serra, Gaspar dePortola).
4.	 Describe the mapping of, geographic basis of, and economic factors in the placement and
function of the Spanish missions; and understand how the mission system expanded theinfluence of Spain and Catholicism throughout New Spain and Latin America.
5.	 Describe the daily lives of the people, native and nonnative, who occupied the presidios,
missions, ranchos, and pueblos.
6.	 Discuss the role of the Franciscans in changing the economy of California from a hunter-
gatherer economy to an agricultural economy.
7.	 Describe the effects of the Mexican War for Independence on Alta California, including its
effects on the territorial boundaries of North America.
8.	 Discuss the period of Mexican rule in California and its attributes, including land grants,
secularization of the missions, and the rise of the rancho economy.
4.3	 Students explain the economic, social, and political life in California from the 
establishment of the Bear Flag Republic through the Mexican-American War, the 
Gold Rush, and the granting of statehood. 
1.Identify the locations of Mexican settlements in California and those of other settle­
ments, including Fort Ross and Sutter’s Fort.
2.Compare how and why people traveled to California and the routes they traveled
(e.g., James Beckwourth, John Bidwell, John C. Fremont, Pio Pico).
3.Analyze the effects of the Gold Rush on settlements, daily life, politics, and the physi­
cal environment (e.g., using biographies of John Sutter, Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo,
Louise Clapp).
4.Study the lives of women who helped build early California (e.g., Biddy Mason).
5.Discuss how California became a state and how its new government differed fromthose during the Spanish and Mexican periods.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 21 ===
14 	 GRADE FOUR 
4.4	 Students explain how California became an agricultural and industrial power, 
tracing the transformation of the California economy and its political and cul­
tural development since the 1850s. 
1.Understand the story and lasting influence of the Pony Express, Overland Mail Ser­
vice, Western Union, and the building of the transcontinental railroad, including thecontributions of Chinese workers to its construction.
2.Explain how the Gold Rush transformed the economy of California, including the
types of products produced and consumed, changes in towns (e.g., Sacramento, San
Francisco), and economic conflicts between diverse groups of people.
3.Discuss immigration and migration to California between 1850 and 1900, including thediverse composition of those who came; the countries of origin and their relative
locations; and conflicts and accords among the diverse groups (e.g., the 1882 Chinese
Exclusion Act).
4.Describe rapid American immigration, internal migration, settlement, and the growthof towns and cities (e.g., Los Angeles).
5.Discuss the effects of the Great Depression, the Dust Bowl, and World War II on
California.
6.Describe the development and locations of new industries since the turn of the cen­
tury, such as the aerospace industry, electronics industry, large-scale commercial
agriculture and irrigation projects, the oil and automobile industries, communications
and defense industries, and important trade links with the Pacific Basin.
7.Trace the evolution of California’s water system into a network of dams, aqueducts,and reservoirs.
8.Describe the history and development of California’s public education system, includ­
ing universities and community colleges.
9.Analyze the impact of twentieth-century Californians on the nation’s artistic and
cultural development, including the rise of the entertainment industry (e.g., Louis B.Meyer, Walt Disney, John Steinbeck, Ansel Adams, Dorothea Lange, John Wayne).
4.5	 Students understand the structures, functions, and powers of the local, state, 
and federal governments as described in the U.S. Constitution. 
1.	 Discuss what the U.S. Constitution is and why it is important (i.e., a written document
that defines the structure and purpose of the U.S. government and describes the sharedpowers of federal, state, and local governments).
2.	 Understand the purpose of the California Constitution, its key principles, and its relation­
ship to the U.S. Constitution.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 22 ===
GRADE FOUR 15 
3.	 Describe the similarities (e.g., written documents, rule of law, consent of the governed,
three separate branches) and differences (e.g., scope of jurisdiction, limits on government
powers, use of the military) among federal, state, and local governments.
4.	 Explain the structures and functions of state governments, including the roles and re­
sponsibilities of their elected officials.
5.	 Describe the components of California’s governance structure (e.g., cities and towns,
Indian rancherias and reservations, counties, school districts).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 23 ===
16
Grade Five 
United States History and Geography: Making a New Nation 
Students in grade five study the development of the nation up to 1850, with an empha­
sis on the people who were already here, when and from where others arrived, and why they came. Students learn about the colonial government founded on Judeo-Christian principles, the ideals of the Enlightenment, and the English traditions of self-government. They recognize that ours is a nation that has a constitution that derives its power from the people, that has gone through a revolution, that once sanctioned sla­very, that experienced conflict over land with the original inhabitants, and that experi­enced a westward movement that took its people across the continent. Studying the cause, course, and consequences of the early explorations through the War for Indepen­dence and western expansion is central to students’ fundamental understanding of how the principles of the American republic form the basis of a pluralistic society in which individual rights are secured. 
5.1	 Students describe the major pre-Columbian settlements, including the cliff 
dwellers and pueblo people of the desert Southwest, the American Indians of 
the Pacific Northwest, the nomadic nations of the Great Plains, and the wood­land peoples east of the Mississippi River. 
1.	 Describe how geography and climate influenced the way various nations lived and
adjusted to the natural environment, including locations of villages, the distinct structures
that they built, and how they obtained food, clothing, tools, and utensils.
2.	 Describe their varied customs and folklore traditions.
3.	 Explain their varied economies and systems of government.
16 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 24 ===
GRADE FIVE 17 
5.2	 Students trace the routes of early explorers and describe the early explorations 
of the Americas. 
1.Describe the entrepreneurial characteristics of early explorers (e.g., Christopher
Columbus, Francisco Vásquez de Coronado) and the technological developments
that made sea exploration by latitude and longitude possible (e.g., compass, sextant,
astrolabe, seaworthy ships, chronometers, gunpowder).
2.Explain the aims, obstacles, and accomplishments of the explorers, sponsors, andleaders of key European expeditions and the reasons Europeans chose to explore and
colonize the world (e.g., the Spanish Reconquista, the Protestant Reformation, the
Counter Reformation).
3.Trace the routes of the major land explorers of the United States, the distances traveledby explorers, and the Atlantic trade routes that linked Africa, the West Indies, the
British colonies, and Europe.
4.Locate on maps of North and South America land claimed by Spain, France, England,
Portugal, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Russia.
5.3	 Students describe the cooperation and conflict that existed among the American 
Indians and between the Indian nations and the new settlers. 
1.Describe the competition among the English, French, Spanish, Dutch, and Indian
nations for control of North America.
2.Describe the cooperation that existed between the colonists and Indians during the
1600s and 1700s (e.g., in agriculture, the fur trade, military alliances, treaties, culturalinterchanges).
3.Examine the conflicts before the Revolutionary War (e.g., the Pequot and King Philip’s
Wars in New England, the Powhatan Wars in Virginia, the French and Indian War).
4.Discuss the role of broken treaties and massacres and the factors that led to the Indi­
ans’ defeat, including the resistance of Indian nations to encroachments and assimila­tion (e.g., the story of the Trail of Tears).
5.Describe the internecine Indian conflicts, including the competing claims for control of
lands (e.g., actions of the Iroquois, Huron, Lakota [Sioux]).
6.Explain the influence and achievements of significant leaders of the time (e.g., John
Marshall, Andrew Jackson, Chief Tecumseh, Chief Logan, Chief John Ross, Sequoyah).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 25 ===
18 	 GRADE FIVE 
5.4	 Students understand the political, religious, social, and economic institutions 
that evolved in the colonial era. 
1.Understand the influence of location and physical setting on the founding of the
original 13 colonies, and identify on a map the locations of the colonies and of the
American Indian nations already inhabiting these areas.
2.Identify the major individuals and groups responsible for the founding of the various
colonies and the reasons for their founding (e.g., John Smith, Virginia; Roger Williams,Rhode Island; William Penn, Pennsylvania; Lord Baltimore, Maryland; William
Bradford, Plymouth; John Winthrop, Massachusetts).
3.Describe the religious aspects of the earliest colonies (e.g., Puritanism in Massachu­
setts, Anglicanism in Virginia, Catholicism in Maryland, Quakerism in Pennsylvania).
4.Identify the significance and leaders of the First Great Awakening, which marked ashift in religious ideas, practices, and allegiances in the colonial period, the growth of
religious toleration, and free exercise of religion.
5.Understand how the British colonial period created the basis for the development of
political self-government and a free-market economic system and the differencesbetween the British, Spanish, and French colonial systems.
6.Describe the introduction of slavery into America, the responses of slave families to
their condition, the ongoing struggle between proponents and opponents of slavery,
and the gradual institutionalization of slavery in the South.
7.Explain the early democratic ideas and practices that emerged during the colonial
period, including the significance of representative assemblies and town meetings.
5.5	 Students explain the causes of the American Revolution. 
1.Understand how political, religious, and economic ideas and interests brought about
the Revolution (e.g., resistance to imperial policy, the Stamp Act, the Townshend Acts,
taxes on tea, Coercive Acts).
2.Know the significance of the first and second Continental Congresses and of the
Committees of Correspondence.
3.Understand the people and events associated with the drafting and signing of theDeclaration of Independence and the document’s significance, including the key
political concepts it embodies, the origins of those concepts, and its role in severing
ties with Great Britain.
4.Describe the views, lives, and impact of key individuals during this period (e.g.,King George III, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, Benjamin
Franklin, John Adams).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 26 ===
GRADE FIVE 19 
5.6 Students understand the course and consequences of the American Revolution. 
1.Identify and map the major military battles, campaigns, and turning points of the
Revolutionary War, the roles of the American and British leaders, and the Indian
leaders’ alliances on both sides.
2.Describe the contributions of France and other nations and of individuals to the out­come of the Revolution (e.g., Benjamin Franklin’s negotiations with the French, the
French navy, the Treaty of Paris, The Netherlands, Russia, the Marquis Marie Joseph
de Lafayette, Tadeusz Ko´ sciuszko, Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben).
3.Identify the different roles women played during the Revolution (e.g., Abigail Adams,Martha Washington, Molly Pitcher, Phillis Wheatley, Mercy Otis Warren).
4.Understand the personal impact and economic hardship of the war on families, prob­
lems of financing the war, wartime inflation, and laws against hoarding goods and
materials and profiteering.
5.Explain how state constitutions that were established after 1776 embodied the ideals ofthe American Revolution and helped serve as models for the U.S. Constitution.
6.Demonstrate knowledge of the significance of land policies developed under the
Continental Congress (e.g., sale of western lands, the Northwest Ordinance of 1787)
and those policies’ impact on American Indians’ land.
7.Understand how the ideals set forth in the Declaration of Independence changed the
way people viewed slavery.
5.7 Students describe the people and events associated with the development of the 
U.S. Constitution and analyze the Constitution’s significance as the foundation
of the American republic. 
1.List the shortcomings of the Articles of Confederation as set forth by their critics.
2.Explain the significance of the new Constitution of 1787, including the struggles over
its ratification and the reasons for the addition of the Bill of Rights.
3.Understand the fundamental principles of American constitutional democracy,
including how the government derives its power from the people and the primacy ofindividual liberty.
4.Understand how the Constitution is designed to secure our liberty by both empower­
ing and limiting central government and compare the powers granted to citizens,
Congress, the president, and the Supreme Court with those reserved to the states.
5.Discuss the meaning of the American creed that calls on citizens to safeguard theliberty of individual Americans within a unified nation, to respect the rule of law, and
to preserve the Constitution.
6.Know the songs that express American ideals (e.g., “America the Beautiful,” “The Star
Spangled Banner”).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 27 ===
20 	 GRADE FIVE 
5.8	 Students trace the colonization, immigration, and settlement patterns of the 
American people from 1789 to the mid-1800s, with emphasis on the role of 
economic incentives, effects of the physical and political geography, and 
transportation systems. 
1.Discuss the waves of immigrants from Europe between 1789 and 1850 and their modes
of transportation into the Ohio and Mississippi Valleys and through the Cumberland
Gap (e.g., overland wagons, canals, flatboats, steamboats).
2.Name the states and territories that existed in 1850 and identify their locations andmajor geographical features (e.g., mountain ranges, principal rivers, dominant plant
regions).
3.Demonstrate knowledge of the explorations of the trans-Mississippi West following
the Louisiana Purchase (e.g., Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, Zebulon Pike,John Fremont).
4.Discuss the experiences of settlers on the overland trails to the West (e.g., location of
the routes; purpose of the journeys; the influence of the terrain, rivers, vegetation, and
climate; life in the territories at the end of these trails).
5.Describe the continued migration of Mexican settlers into Mexican territories of theWest and Southwest.
6.Relate how and when California, Texas, Oregon, and other western lands became partof the United States, including the significance of the Texas War for Independence andthe Mexican-American War.
5.9 Students know the location of the current 50 states and the names of their 
capitals. 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 28 ===
21
Grades Six 
Eight Through 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills
 
The intellectual skills noted below are to be learned through, and applied to, the content 
standards for grades six through eight. They are to be assessed only in conjunction with the content standards in grades six through eight. 
In addition to the standards for grades six through eight, students demonstrate the following 
intellectual reasoning, reflection, and research skills: 
Chronological and Spatial Thinking 
1.	 Students explain how major events are related to one another in time.
2.	 Students construct various time lines of key events, people, and periods of the historical
era they are studying.
3.	 Students use a variety of maps and documents to identify physical and cultural features
of neighborhoods, cities, states, and countries and to explain the historical migration of
people, expansion and disintegration of empires, and the growth of economic systems.
Research, Evidence, and Point of View 
1.	 Students frame questions that can be answered by historical study and research.
2.	 Students distinguish fact from opinion in historical narratives and stories.3.	 Students distinguish relevant from irrelevant information, essential from incidental
information, and verifiable from unverifiable information in historical narratives and
stories.
4.	 Students assess the credibility of primary and secondary sources and draw sound con­
clusions from them.
5.	 Students detect the different historical points of view on historical events and determine
the context in which the historical statements were made (the questions asked, sourcesused, author’s perspectives).
21 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 29 ===
22 GRADES  SIX THROUGH  EIGHT 
Historical Interpretation 
1.	 Students explain the central issues and problems from the past, placing people and
events in a matrix of time and place.
2.	 Students understand and distinguish cause, effect, sequence, and correlation in historical
events, including the long- and short-term causal relations.
3.	 Students explain the sources of historical continuity and how the combination of ideas
and events explains the emergence of new patterns.
4.	 Students recognize the role of chance, oversight, and error in history.
5.	 Students recognize that interpretations of history are subject to change as new informa­
tion is uncovered.
6.	 Students interpret basic indicators of economic performance and conduct cost-benefit
analyses of economic and political issues.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 30 ===
23
Grade Six 
World History and Geography: Ancient Civilizations
 
Students in grade six expand their understanding of history by studying the people and 
events that ushered in the dawn of the major Western and non-Western ancient civiliza­tions. Geography is of special significance in the development of the human story. Continued emphasis is placed on the everyday lives, problems, and accomplishments of people, their role in developing social, economic, and political structures, as well as in establishing and spreading ideas that helped transform the world forever. Students develop higher levels of critical thinking by considering why civilizations developed where and when they did, why they became dominant, and why they declined. Stu­dents analyze the interactions among the various cultures, emphasizing their enduring contributions and the link, despite time, between the contemporary and ancient worlds. 
6.1	 Students describe what is known through archaeological studies of the early 
physical and cultural development of humankind from the Paleolithic era to 
the agricultural revolution. 
1.Describe the hunter-gatherer societies, including the development of tools and the use
of fire.
2.Identify the locations of human communities that populated the major regions of the
world and describe how humans adapted to a variety of environments.
3.Discuss the climatic changes and human modifications of the physical environment
that gave rise to the domestication of plants and animals and new sources of clothingand shelter .
23 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 31 ===
24 	 GRADE SIX 
6.2	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the early civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Kush. 
1.Locate and describe the major river systems and discuss the physical settings that
supported permanent settlement and early civilizations.
2.Trace the development of agricultural techniques that permitted the production of
economic surplus and the emergence of cities as centers of culture and power.
3.Understand the relationship between religion and the social and political order in
Mesopotamia and Egypt.
4.Know the significance of Hammurabi’s Code.
5.Discuss the main features of Egyptian art and architecture.
6.Describe the role of Egyptian trade in the eastern Mediterranean and Nile valley.
7.Understand the significance of Queen Hatshepsut and Ramses the Great.
8.Identify the location of the Kush civilization and describe its political, commercial, andcultural relations with Egypt.
9.Trace the evolution of language and its written forms.
6.3	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the Ancient Hebrews. 
1.Describe the origins and significance of Judaism as the first monotheistic religionbased on the concept of one God who sets down moral laws for humanity.
2.Identify the sources of the ethical teachings and central beliefs of Judaism (the HebrewBible, the Commentaries): belief in God, observance of law, practice of the concepts of
righteousness and justice, and importance of study; and describe how the ideas of the
Hebrew traditions are reflected in the moral and ethical traditions of Western civiliza­tion.
3.Explain the significance of Abraham, Moses, Naomi, Ruth, David, and Yohanan ben
Zaccai in the development of the Jewish religion.
4.Discuss the locations of the settlements and movements of Hebrew peoples, including
the Exodus and their movement to and from Egypt, and outline the significance of theExodus to the Jewish and other people.
5.Discuss how Judaism survived and developed despite the continuing dispersion of
much of the Jewish population from Jerusalem and the rest of Israel after the destruc­
tion of the second Temple in 
A.D. 70.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 32 ===
GRADE SIX 25 
6.4	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the early civilizations of Ancient Greece. 
1.Discuss the connections between geography and the development of city-states in the
region of the Aegean Sea, including patterns of trade and commerce among Greek
city-states and within the wider Mediterranean region.
2.Trace the transition from tyranny and oligarchy to early democratic forms of govern­
ment and back to dictatorship in ancient Greece, including the significance of theinvention of the idea of citizenship (e.g., from 
Pericles’ Funeral Oration).
3.State the key differences between Athenian, or direct, democracy and representative
democracy.
4.Explain the significance of Greek mythology to the everyday life of people in the
region and how Greek literature continues to permeate our literature and languagetoday, drawing from Greek mythology and epics, such as Homer’s Iliad
 and Odyssey,
and from Aesop’s Fables.
5.Outline the founding, expansion, and political organization of the Persian Empire.
6.Compare and contrast life in Athens and Sparta, with emphasis on their roles in thePersian and Peloponnesian Wars.
7.Trace the rise of Alexander the Great and the spread of Greek culture eastward and
into Egypt.
8.Describe the enduring contributions of important Greek figures in the arts and sci­
ences (e.g., Hypatia, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, Thucydides).
6.5	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the early civilizations of India. 
1.Locate and describe the major river system and discuss the physical setting that sup­ported the rise of this civilization.
2.Discuss the significance of the Aryan invasions.
3.Explain the major beliefs and practices of Brahmanism in India and how they evolved
into early Hinduism.
4.Outline the social structure of the caste system.
5.Know the life and moral teachings of Buddha and how Buddhism spread in India,
Ceylon, and Central Asia.
6.Describe the growth of the Maurya empire and the political and moral achievementsof the emperor Asoka.
7.Discuss important aesthetic and intellectual traditions (e.g., Sanskrit literature, includ­
ing the 
Bhagavad Gita;  medicine; metallurgy; and mathematics, including Hindu-
Arabic numerals and the zero).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 33 ===
26 	 GRADE SIX 
6.6	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the early civilizations of China. 
1.Locate and describe the origins of Chinese civilization in the Huang-He Valley during
the Shang Dynasty.
2.Explain the geographic features of China that made governance and the spread ofideas and goods difficult and served to isolate the country from the rest of the world.
3.Know about the life of Confucius and the fundamental teachings of Confucianism and
Taoism.
4.Identify the political and cultural problems prevalent in the time of Confucius and how
he sought to solve them.
5.List the policies and achievements of the emperor Shi Huangdi in unifying northernChina under the Qin Dynasty.
6.Detail the political contributions of the Han Dynasty to the development of the impe­
rial bureaucratic state and the expansion of the empire.
7.Cite the significance of the trans-Eurasian “silk roads” in the period of the Han Dy­
nasty and Roman Empire and their locations.
8.Describe the diffusion of Buddhism northward to China during the Han Dynasty.
6.7	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures during the development of Rome. 
1.Identify the location and describe the rise of the Roman Republic, including the impor­tance of such mythical and historical figures as Aeneas, Romulus and Remus,Cincinnatus, Julius Caesar, and Cicero.
2.Describe the government of the Roman Republic and its significance (e.g., writtenconstitution and tripartite government, checks and balances, civic duty).
3.Identify the location of and the political and geographic reasons for the growth of
Roman territories and expansion of the empire, including how the empire fostered
economic growth through the use of currency and trade routes.
4.Discuss the influence of Julius Caesar and Augustus in Rome’s transition from republic
to empire.
5.Trace the migration of Jews around the Mediterranean region and the effects of their
conflict with the Romans, including the Romans’ restrictions on their right to live in
Jerusalem.
6.Note the origins of Christianity in the Jewish Messianic prophecies, the life and teach­
ings of Jesus of Nazareth as described in the New Testament, and the contribution of
St. Paul the Apostle to the definition and spread of Christian beliefs (e.g., belief in the
Trinity, resurrection, salvation).
7.Describe the circumstances that led to the spread of Christianity in Europe and other
Roman territories.
8.Discuss the legacies of Roman art and architecture, technology and science, literature,
language, and law.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 34 ===
27
Grade Seven 
World History and Geography: 
Medieval and Early Modern Times 
Students in grade seven study the social, cultural, and technological changes that oc­
curred in Europe, Africa, and Asia in the years A.D. 500–1789. After reviewing the an­
cient world and the ways in which archaeologists and historians uncover the past, students study the history and geography of great civilizations that were developing concurrently throughout the world during medieval and early modern times. They examine the growing economic interaction among civilizations as well as the exchange of ideas, beliefs, technologies, and commodities. They learn about the resulting growth of Enlightenment philosophy and the new examination of the concepts of reason and authority, the natural rights of human beings and the divine right of kings, experimen­talism in science, and the dogma of belief. Finally, students assess the political forces let loose by the Enlightenment, particularly the rise of democratic ideas, and they learn about the continuing influence of these ideas in the world today. 
7.1	 Students analyze the causes and effects of the vast expansion and ultimate 
disintegration of the Roman Empire. 
1.Study the early strengths and lasting contributions of Rome (e.g., significance of
Roman citizenship; rights under Roman law; Roman art, architecture, engineering, and
philosophy; preservation and transmission of Christianity) and its ultimate internal
weaknesses (e.g., rise of autonomous military powers within the empire, underminingof citizenship by the growth of corruption and slavery, lack of education, and distribu­
tion of news).
2.Discuss the geographic borders of the empire at its height and the factors that threat­
ened its territorial cohesion.
3.Describe the establishment by Constantine of the new capital in Constantinople andthe development of the Byzantine Empire, with an emphasis on the consequences of
the development of two distinct European civilizations, Eastern Orthodox and Roman
Catholic, and their two distinct views on church-state relations.
27 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 35 ===
28 	 GRADE SEVEN 
7.2	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the civilizations of Islam in the Middle Ages. 
1.Identify the physical features and describe the climate of the Arabian peninsula, its
relationship to surrounding bodies of land and water, and nomadic and sedentary
ways of life.
2.Trace the origins of Islam and the life and teachings of Muhammad, including Islamic
teachings on the connection with Judaism and Christianity.
3.Explain the significance of the Qur’an and the Sunnah as the primary sources of Islamicbeliefs, practice, and law, and their influence in Muslims’ daily life.
4.Discuss the expansion of Muslim rule through military conquests and treaties, empha­
sizing the cultural blending within Muslim civilization and the spread and acceptance
of Islam and the Arabic language.
5.Describe the growth of cities and the establishment of trade routes among Asia, Africa,and Europe, the products and inventions that traveled along these routes (e.g., spices,
textiles, paper, steel, new crops), and the role of merchants in Arab society.
6.Understand the intellectual exchanges among Muslim scholars of Eurasia and Africa
and the contributions Muslim scholars made to later civilizations in the areas of science,geography, mathematics, philosophy, medicine, art, and literature.
7.3	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the civilizations of China in the Middle Ages. 
1.Describe the reunification of China under the Tang Dynasty and reasons for the spreadof Buddhism in Tang China, Korea, and Japan.
2.Describe agricultural, technological, and commercial developments during the Tang
and Sung periods.
3.Analyze the influences of Confucianism and changes in Confucian thought during the
Sung and Mongol periods.
4.Understand the importance of both overland trade and maritime expeditions betweenChina and other civilizations in the Mongol Ascendancy and Ming Dynasty.
5.Trace the historic influence of such discoveries as tea, the manufacture of paper, wood­
block printing, the compass, and gunpowder.
6.Describe the development of the imperial state and the scholar-official class.
7.4	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social struc­
tures of the sub-Saharan civilizations of Ghana and Mali in Medieval Africa. 
1.Study the Niger River and the relationship of vegetation zones of forest, savannah, anddesert to trade in gold, salt, food, and slaves; and the growth of the Ghana and Mali
empires.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 36 ===
GRADE SEVEN 29 
2.Analyze the importance of family, labor specialization, and regional commerce in the
development of states and cities in West Africa.
3.Describe the role of the trans-Saharan caravan trade in the changing religious and
cultural characteristics of West Africa and the influence of Islamic beliefs, ethics, andlaw.
4.Trace the growth of the Arabic language in government, trade, and Islamic scholarship
in West Africa.
5.Describe the importance of written and oral traditions in the transmission of African
history and culture.
7.5	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the civilizations of Medieval Japan. 
1.Describe the significance of Japan’s proximity to China and Korea and the intellectual,linguistic, religious, and philosophical influence of those countries on Japan.
2.Discuss the reign of Prince Shotoku of Japan and the characteristics of Japanese society
and family life during his reign.
3.Describe the values, social customs, and traditions prescribed by the lord-vassal
system consisting of shogun, daimyo,  and samurai  and the lasting influence of the
warrior code in the twentieth century.
4.Trace the development of distinctive forms of Japanese Buddhism.
5.Study the ninth and tenth centuries’ golden age of literature, art, and drama and its
lasting effects on culture today, including Murasaki Shikibu’s Tale of Genji.
6.Analyze the rise of a military society in the late twelfth century and the role of the
samurai in that society.
7.6	 Students analyze the geographic, political, economic, religious, and social 
structures of the civilizations of Medieval Europe. 
1.Study the geography of the Europe and the Eurasian land mass, including its location,
topography, waterways, vegetation, and climate and their relationship to ways of life
in Medieval Europe.
2.Describe the spread of Christianity north of the Alps and the roles played by the earlychurch and by monasteries in its diffusion after the fall of the western half of the
Roman Empire.
3.Understand the development of feudalism, its role in the medieval European
economy, the way in which it was influenced by physical geography (the role of themanor and the growth of towns), and how feudal relationships provided the founda­
tion of political order.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 37 ===
30 	 GRADE SEVEN 
4.Demonstrate an understanding of the conflict and cooperation between the Papacy
and European monarchs (e.g., Charlemagne, Gregory VII, Emperor Henry IV).
5.Know the significance of developments in medieval English legal and constitutional
practices and their importance in the rise of modern democratic thought and represen­
tative institutions (e.g., Magna Carta, parliament, development of habeas corpus, anindependent judiciary in England).
6.Discuss the causes and course of the religious Crusades and their effects on the Chris­
tian, Muslim, and Jewish populations in Europe, with emphasis on the increasing
contact by Europeans with cultures of the Eastern Mediterranean world.
7.Map the spread of the bubonic plague from Central Asia to China, the Middle East,and Europe and describe its impact on global population.
8.Understand the importance of the Catholic church as a political, intellectual, and
aesthetic institution (e.g., founding of universities, political and spiritual roles of the
clergy, creation of monastic and mendicant religious orders, preservation of the Latinlanguage and religious texts, St. Thomas Aquinas’s synthesis of classical philosophy
with Christian theology, and the concept of “natural law”).
9.Know the history of the decline of Muslim rule in the Iberian Peninsula that culmi­
nated in the Reconquista and the rise of Spanish and Portuguese kingdoms.
7.7	 Students compare and contrast the geographic, political, economic, religious, 
and social structures of the Meso-American and Andean civilizations. 
1.Study the locations, landforms, and climates of Mexico, Central America, and South
America and their effects on Mayan, Aztec, and Incan economies, trade, and develop­
ment of urban societies.
2.Study the roles of people in each society, including class structures, family life, war­fare, religious beliefs and practices, and slavery.
3.Explain how and where each empire arose and how the Aztec and Incan empires were
defeated by the Spanish.
4.Describe the artistic and oral traditions and architecture in the three civilizations.
5.Describe the Meso-American achievements in astronomy and mathematics, including
the development of the calendar and the Meso-American knowledge of seasonalchanges to the civilizations’ agricultural systems.
7.8	 Students analyze the origins, accomplishments, and geographic diffusion of 
the Renaissance. 
1.Describe the way in which the revival of classical learning and the arts fostered a new
interest in humanism (i.e., a balance between intellect and religious faith).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 38 ===
GRADE SEVEN 31 
2.Explain the importance of Florence in the early stages of the Renaissance and the
growth of independent trading cities (e.g., Venice), with emphasis on the cities’ impor­
tance in the spread of Renaissance ideas.
3.Understand the effects of the reopening of the ancient “Silk Road” between Europe
and China, including Marco Polo’s travels and the location of his routes.
4.Describe the growth and effects of new ways of disseminating information (e.g., theability to manufacture paper, translation of the Bible into the vernacular, printing).
5.Detail advances made in literature, the arts, science, mathematics, cartography, engi­
neering, and the understanding of human anatomy and astronomy (e.g., by Dante
Alighieri, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo di Buonarroti Simoni, Johann Gutenberg,William Shakespeare).
7.9	 Students analyze the historical developments of the Reformation. 
1.List the causes for the internal turmoil in and weakening of the Catholic church (e.g.,tax policies, selling of indulgences).
2.Describe the theological, political, and economic ideas of the major figures during theReformation (e.g., Desiderius Erasmus, Martin Luther, John Calvin, William Tyndale).
3.Explain Protestants’ new practices of church self-government and the influence of
those practices on the development of democratic practices and ideas of federalism.
4.Identify and locate the European regions that remained Catholic and those that be­
came Protestant and explain how the division affected the distribution of religions in
the New World.
5.Analyze how the Counter-Reformation revitalized the Catholic church and the forces
that fostered the movement (e.g., St. Ignatius of Loyola and the Jesuits, the Council ofTrent).
6.Understand the institution and impact of missionaries on Christianity and the diffu­
sion of Christianity from Europe to other parts of the world in the medieval and early
modern periods; locate missions on a world map.
7.Describe the Golden Age of cooperation between Jews and Muslims in medieval Spainthat promoted creativity in art, literature, and science, including how that cooperation
was terminated by the religious persecution of individuals and groups (e.g., the
Spanish Inquisition and the expulsion of Jews and Muslims from Spain in 1492).
7.10	 Students analyze the historical developments of the Scientific Revolution and 
its lasting effect on religious, political, and cultural institutions. 
1.Discuss the roots of the Scientific Revolution (e.g., Greek rationalism; Jewish, Chris­tian, and Muslim science; Renaissance humanism; new knowledge from global explo­
ration).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 39 ===
32	 GRADE SEVEN 
2.Understand the significance of the new scientific theories (e.g., those of Copernicus,
Galileo, Kepler, Newton) and the significance of new inventions (e.g., the telescope,
microscope, thermometer, barometer).
3.Understand the scientific method advanced by Bacon and Descartes, the influence of
new scientific rationalism on the growth of democratic ideas, and the coexistence ofscience with traditional religious beliefs.
7.11	 Students analyze political and economic change in the sixteenth, seventeenth, 
and eighteenth centuries (the Age of Exploration, the Enlightenment, and the 
Age of Reason). 
1.Know the great voyages of discovery, the locations of the routes, and the influence of
cartography in the development of a new European worldview.
2.Discuss the exchanges of plants, animals, technology, culture, and ideas among Eu­
rope, Africa, Asia, and the Americas in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and the
major economic and social effects on each continent.
3.Examine the origins of modern capitalism; the influence of mercantilism and cottageindustry; the elements and importance of a market economy in seventeenth-century
Europe; the changing international trading and marketing patterns, including their
locations on a world map; and the influence of explorers and map makers.
4.Explain how the main ideas of the Enlightenment can be traced back to such move­
ments as the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Scientific Revolution and to the
Greeks, Romans, and Christianity.
5.Describe how democratic thought and institutions were influenced by Enlightenmentthinkers (e.g., John Locke, Charles-Louis Montesquieu, American founders).
6.Discuss how the principles in the Magna Carta were embodied in such documents as
the English Bill of Rights and the American Declaration of Independence.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 40 ===
33
Grade Eight 
United States History and Geography: Growth and Conflict
 
Students in grade eight study the ideas, issues, and events from the framing of the 
Constitution up to World War I, with an emphasis on America’s role in the war. After reviewing the development of America’s democratic institutions founded on the Judeo-Christian heritage and English parliamentary traditions, particularly the shaping of the Constitution, students trace the development of American politics, society, culture, and economy and relate them to the emergence of major regional differences. They learn about the challenges facing the new nation, with an emphasis on the causes, course, and consequences of the Civil War. They make connections between the rise of industrializa­tion and contemporary social and economic conditions. 
8.1	 Students understand the major events preceding the founding of the nation and 
relate their significance to the development of American constitutional democ­
racy. 
1.Describe the relationship between the moral and political ideas of the Great Awaken­
ing and the development of revolutionary fervor.
2.Analyze the philosophy of government expressed in the Declaration of Independence,
with an emphasis on government as a means of securing individual rights (e.g., key
phrases such as “all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creatorwith certain unalienable Rights”).
3.Analyze how the American Revolution affected other nations, especially France.
4.Describe the nation’s blend of civic republicanism, classical liberal principles, and
English parliamentary traditions.
8.2	 Students analyze the political principles underlying the U.S. Constitution and 
compare the enumerated and implied powers of the federal government. 
1.Discuss the significance of the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights, and the May­
flower Compact.
33 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 41 ===
34 	 GRADE EIGHT 
2.Analyze the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution and the success of each in
implementing the ideals of the Declaration of Independence.
3.Evaluate the major debates that occurred during the development of the Constitution
and their ultimate resolutions in such areas as shared power among institutions, di­
vided state-federal power, slavery, the rights of individuals and states (later addressedby the addition of the Bill of Rights), and the status of American Indian nations under
the commerce clause.
4.Describe the political philosophy underpinning the Constitution as specified in the
Federalist Papers (authored by James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay) and
the role of such leaders as Madison, George Washington, Roger Sherman, Gouverneur
Morris, and James Wilson in the writing and ratification of the Constitution.
5.Understand the significance of Jefferson’s Statute for Religious Freedom as a forerunner
of the First Amendment and the origins, purpose, and differing views of the founding
fathers on the issue of the separation of church and state.
6.Enumerate the powers of government set forth in the Constitution and the fundamental
liberties ensured by the Bill of Rights.
7.Describe the principles of federalism, dual sovereignty, separation of powers, checks
and balances, the nature and purpose of majority rule, and the ways in which the
American idea of constitutionalism preserves individual rights.
8.3	 Students understand the foundation of the American political system and the 
ways in which citizens participate in it. 
1.Analyze the principles and concepts codified in state constitutions between 1777 and1781 that created the context out of which American political institutions and ideas
developed.
2.Explain how the ordinances of 1785 and 1787 privatized national resources and trans­
ferred federally owned lands into private holdings, townships, and states.
3.Enumerate the advantages of a common market among the states as foreseen in and
protected by the Constitution’s clauses on interstate commerce, common coinage, and
full-faith and credit.
4.Understand how the conflicts between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton
resulted in the emergence of two political parties (e.g., view of foreign policy, Alien and
Sedition Acts, economic policy, National Bank, funding and assumption of the revolu­
tionary debt).
5.Know the significance of domestic resistance movements and ways in which the central
government responded to such movements (e.g., Shays’ Rebellion, the Whiskey Rebel­
lion).
6.Describe the basic law-making process and how the Constitution provides numerous
opportunities for citizens to participate in the political process and to monitor and
influence government (e.g., function of elections, political parties, interest groups).
7.Understand the functions and responsibilities of a free press.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 42 ===
GRADE EIGHT 35 
8.4	 Students analyze the aspirations and ideals of the people of the new nation. 
1.Describe the country’s physical landscapes, political divisions, and territorial expan­
sion during the terms of the first four presidents.
2.Explain the policy significance of famous speeches (e.g., Washington’s Farewell Ad­
dress, Jefferson’s 1801 Inaugural Address, John Q. Adams’s Fourth of July 1821 Ad­
dress).
3.Analyze the rise of capitalism and the economic problems and conflicts that accompa­nied it (e.g., Jackson’s opposition to the National Bank; early decisions of the U.S.
Supreme Court that reinforced the sanctity of contracts and a capitalist economic
system of law).
4.Discuss daily life, including traditions in art, music, and literature, of early nationalAmerica (e.g., through writings by Washington Irving, James Fenimore Cooper).
8.5	 Students analyze U.S. foreign policy in the early Republic. 
1.Understand the political and economic causes and consequences of the War of 1812and know the major battles, leaders, and events that led to a final peace.
2.Know the changing boundaries of the United States and describe the relationships thecountry had with its neighbors (current Mexico and Canada) and Europe, including
the influence of the Monroe Doctrine, and how those relationships influenced west­
ward expansion and the Mexican-American War.
3.Outline the major treaties with American Indian nations during the administrations ofthe first four presidents and the varying outcomes of those treaties.
8.6	 Students analyze the divergent paths of the American people from 1800 to the 
mid-1800s and the challenges they faced, with emphasis on the Northeast. 
1.Discuss the influence of industrialization and technological developments on theregion, including human modification of the landscape and how physical geographyshaped human actions (e.g., growth of cities, deforestation, farming, mineral extrac­
tion).
2.Outline the physical obstacles to and the economic and political factors involved in
building a network of roads, canals, and railroads (e.g., Henry Clay’s American Sys­tem).
3.List the reasons for the wave of immigration from Northern Europe to the United
States and describe the growth in the number, size, and spatial arrangements of cities
(e.g., Irish immigrants and the Great Irish Famine).
4.Study the lives of black Americans who gained freedom in the North and foundedschools and churches to advance their rights and communities.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 43 ===
36 	 GRADE EIGHT 
5.Trace the development of the American education system from its earliest roots,
including the roles of religious and private schools and Horace Mann’s campaign for
free public education and its assimilating role in American culture.
6.Examine the women’s suffrage movement (e.g., biographies, writings, and speeches of
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Margaret Fuller, Lucretia Mott, Susan B. Anthony).
7.Identify common themes in American art as well as transcendentalism and individual­ism (e.g., writings about and by Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau,
Herman Melville, Louisa May Alcott, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow).
8.7	 Students analyze the divergent paths of the American people in the South from 
1800 to the mid-1800s and the challenges they faced. 
1.Describe the development of the agrarian economy in the South, identify the locationsof the cotton-producing states, and discuss the significance of cotton and the cotton
gin.
2.Trace the origins and development of slavery; its effects on black Americans and on
the region’s political, social, religious, economic, and cultural development; andidentify the strategies that were tried to both overturn and preserve it (e.g., through
the writings and historical documents on Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey).
3.Examine the characteristics of white Southern society and how the physical environ­
ment influenced events and conditions prior to the Civil War.
4.Compare the lives of and opportunities for free blacks in the North with those of free
blacks in the South.
8.8	 Students analyze the divergent paths of the American people in the West from 
1800 to the mid-1800s and the challenges they faced. 
1.Discuss the election of Andrew Jackson as president in 1828, the importance of Jackso­
nian democracy, and his actions as president (e.g., the spoils system, veto of the Na­tional Bank, policy of Indian removal, opposition to the Supreme Court).
2.Describe the purpose, challenges, and economic incentives associated with westward
expansion, including the concept of Manifest Destiny (e.g., the Lewis and Clark expe­
dition, accounts of the removal of Indians, the Cherokees’ “Trail of Tears,” settlementof the Great Plains) and the territorial acquisitions that spanned numerous decades.
3.Describe the role of pioneer women and the new status that western women achieved
(e.g., Laura Ingalls Wilder, Annie Bidwell; slave women gaining freedom in the West;
Wyoming granting suffrage to women in 1869).
4.Examine the importance of the great rivers and the struggle over water rights.
5.Discuss Mexican settlements and their locations, cultural traditions, attitudes towardslavery, land-grant system, and economies.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 44 ===
GRADE EIGHT 37 
6.Describe the Texas War for Independence and the Mexican-American War, including
territorial settlements, the aftermath of the wars, and the effects the wars had on the
lives of Americans, including Mexican Americans today.
8.9	 Students analyze the early and steady attempts to abolish slavery and to realize 
the ideals of the Declaration of Independence. 
1.Describe the leaders of the movement (e.g., John Quincy Adams and his proposed
constitutional amendment, John Brown and the armed resistance, Harriet Tubmanand the Underground Railroad, Benjamin Franklin, Theodore Weld, William Lloyd
Garrison, Frederick Douglass).
2.Discuss the abolition of slavery in early state constitutions.
3.Describe the significance of the Northwest Ordinance in education and in the banning
of slavery in new states north of the Ohio River.
4.Discuss the importance of the slavery issue as raised by the annexation of Texas andCalifornia’s admission to the union as a free state under the Compromise of 1850.
5.Analyze the significance of the States’ Rights Doctrine, the Missouri Compromise
(1820), the Wilmot Proviso (1846), the Compromise of 1850, Henry Clay’s role in the
Missouri Compromise and the Compromise of 1850, the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854),
the Dred Scott  v. Sandford  decision (1857), and the Lincoln-Douglas debates (1858).
6.Describe the lives of free blacks and the laws that limited their freedom and economic
opportunities.
8.10	 Students analyze the multiple causes, key events, and complex consequences of 
the Civil War. 
1.Compare the conflicting interpretations of state and federal authority as emphasizedin the speeches and writings of statesmen such as Daniel Webster and John C.
Calhoun.
2.Trace the boundaries constituting the North and the South, the geographical
differences between the two regions, and the differences between agrarians andindustrialists.
3.Identify the constitutional issues posed by the doctrine of nullification and secession
and the earliest origins of that doctrine.
4.Discuss Abraham Lincoln’s presidency and his significant writings and speeches and
their relationship to the Declaration of Independence, such as his “House Divided”speech (1858), Gettysburg Address (1863), Emancipation Proclamation (1863), and
inaugural addresses (1861 and 1865).
5.Study the views and lives of leaders (e.g., Ulysses S. Grant, Jefferson Davis, Robert E.
Lee) and soldiers on both sides of the war, including those of black soldiers andregiments.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 45 ===
38	 GRADE EIGHT 
6.Describe critical developments and events in the war, including the major battles,
geographical advantages and obstacles, technological advances, and General Lee’s
surrender at Appomattox.
7.Explain how the war affected combatants, civilians, the physical environment, and
future warfare.
8.11	 Students analyze the character and lasting consequences of Reconstruction. 
1.List the original aims of Reconstruction and describe its effects on the political and
social structures of different regions.
2.Identify the push-pull factors in the movement of former slaves to the cities in the
North and to the West and their differing experiences in those regions (e.g., the experi­ences of Buffalo Soldiers).
3.Understand the effects of the Freedmen’s Bureau and the restrictions placed on the
rights and opportunities of freedmen, including racial segregation and “Jim Crow”
laws.
4.Trace the rise of the Ku Klux Klan and describe the Klan’s effects.
5.Understand the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitutionand analyze their connection to Reconstruction.
8.12	 Students analyze the transformation of the American economy and the chang­
ing social and political conditions in the United States in response to the Indus­
trial Revolution. 
1.Trace patterns of agricultural and industrial development as they relate to climate, use
of natural resources, markets, and trade and locate such development on a map.
2.Identify the reasons for the development of federal Indian policy and the wars with
American Indians and their relationship to agricultural development and industrial­ization.
3.Explain how states and the federal government encouraged business expansion
through tariffs, banking, land grants, and subsidies.
4.Discuss entrepreneurs, industrialists, and bankers in politics, commerce, and industry
(e.g., Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller, Leland Stanford).
5.Examine the location and effects of urbanization, renewed immigration, and industri­alization (e.g., the effects on social fabric of cities, wealth and economic opportunity,
the conservation movement).
6.Discuss child labor, working conditions, and laissez-faire policies toward big business
and examine the labor movement, including its leaders (e.g., Samuel Gompers), itsdemand for collective bargaining, and its strikes and protests over labor conditions.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 46 ===
GRADE EIGHT 39 
7.Identify the new sources of large-scale immigration and the contributions of immi­
grants to the building of cities and the economy; explain the ways in which new social
and economic patterns encouraged assimilation of newcomers into the mainstream
amidst growing cultural diversity; and discuss the new wave of nativism.
8.Identify the characteristics and impact of Grangerism and Populism.
9.Name the significant inventors and their inventions and identify how they improvedthe quality of life (e.g., Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, Orville and Wilbur
Wright).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 47 ===
40
Grades Nine 
Through 
Twelve 
Historical and Social Sciences Analysis Skills
 
The intellectual skills noted below are to be learned through, and applied to, the content 
standards for grades nine through twelve. They are to be assessed only in conjunction 
with the content standards in grades nine through twelve. 
In addition to the standards for grades nine through twelve, students demonstrate the following intellectual, reasoning, reflection, and research skills. 
Chronological and Spatial Thinking 
1.	 Students compare the present with the past, evaluating the consequences of past events
and decisions and determining the lessons that were learned.
2.	 Students analyze how change happens at different rates at different times; understand
that some aspects can change while others remain the same; and understand that change
is complicated and affects not only technology and politics but also values and beliefs.
3.	 Students use a variety of maps and documents to interpret human movement, including
major patterns of domestic and international migration, changing environmental prefer­ences and settlement patterns, the frictions that develop between population groups, andthe diffusion of ideas, technological innovations, and goods.
4.	 Students relate current events to the physical and human characteristics of places and
regions.
Historical Research, Evidence, and Point of View 
1.	 Students distinguish valid arguments from fallacious arguments in historical interpreta­
tions.
2.	 Students identify bias and prejudice in historical interpretations.
3.	 Students evaluate major debates among historians concerning alternative interpretations
of the past, including an analysis of authors’ use of evidence and the distinctions be­
tween sound generalizations and misleading oversimplifications.
4.	 Students construct and test hypotheses; collect, evaluate, and employ information from
multiple primary and secondary sources; and apply it in oral and written presentations.
40 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 48 ===
GRADES  NINE THROUGH  TWELVE 41 
Historical Interpretation 
1.	 Students show the connections, causal and otherwise, between particular historical
events and larger social, economic, and political trends and developments.
2.	 Students recognize the complexity of historical causes and effects, including the limita­
tions on determining cause and effect.
3.	 Students interpret past events and issues within the context in which an event unfolded
rather than solely in terms of present-day norms and values.
4.	 Students understand the meaning, implication, and impact of historical events and
recognize that events could have taken other directions.
5.	 Students analyze human modifications of landscapes and examine the resulting environ­
mental policy issues.
6.	 Students conduct cost-benefit analyses and apply basic economic indicators to analyze
the aggregate economic behavior of the U.S. economy.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 49 ===
42
Grade Ten 
World History, Culture, and Geography: The Modern World
 
Students in grade ten study major turning points that shaped the modern world, from 
the late eighteenth century through the present, including the cause and course of the two world wars. They trace the rise of democratic ideas and develop an understanding of the historical roots of current world issues, especially as they pertain to international relations. They extrapolate from the American experience that democratic ideals are often achieved at a high price, remain vulnerable, and are not practiced everywhere in the world. Students develop an understanding of current world issues and relate them to their historical, geographic, political, economic, and cultural contexts. Students con­sider multiple accounts of events in order to understand international relations from a variety of perspectives. 
10.1	 Students relate the moral and ethical principles in ancient Greek and Roman 
philosophy, in Judaism, and in Christianity to the development of Western 
political thought. 
1.Analyze the similarities and differences in Judeo-Christian and Greco-Roman views
of law, reason and faith, and duties of the individual.
2.Trace the development of the Western political ideas of the rule of law and illegiti­
macy of tyranny, using selections from Plato’s Republic and Aristotle’s Politics.
3.Consider the influence of the U.S. Constitution on political systems in the contempo­
rary world.
10.2	 Students compare and contrast the Glorious Revolution of England, the 
American Revolution, and the French Revolution and their enduring effects 
worldwide on the political expectations for self-government and individual 
liberty. 
1.Compare the major ideas of philosophers and their effects on the democratic revolu­
tions in England, the United States, France, and Latin America (e.g., John Locke,
42 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 50 ===
GRADE TEN 43 
Charles-Louis Montesquieu, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Simón Bolívar, Thomas
 
Jefferson, James Madison).
 
2.List the principles of the Magna Carta, the English Bill of Rights (1689), the AmericanDeclaration of Independence (1776), the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and
the Citizen (1789), and the U.S. Bill of Rights (1791).
3.Understand the unique character of the American Revolution, its spread to other
parts of the world, and its continuing significance to other nations.
4.Explain how the ideology of the French Revolution led France to develop fromconstitutional monarchy to democratic despotism to the Napoleonic empire.
5.Discuss how nationalism spread across Europe with Napoleon but was repressed for
a generation under the Congress of Vienna and Concert of Europe until the Revolu­
tions of 1848.
10.3	 Students analyze the effects of the Industrial Revolution in England, France, 
Germany, Japan, and the United States. 
1.Analyze why England was the first country to industrialize.
2.Examine how scientific and technological changes and new forms of energy brought
about massive social, economic, and cultural change (e.g., the inventions and discov­
eries of James Watt, Eli Whitney, Henry Bessemer, Louis Pasteur, Thomas Edison).
3.Describe the growth of population, rural to urban migration, and growth of citiesassociated with the Industrial Revolution.
4.Trace the evolution of work and labor, including the demise of the slave trade and the
effects of immigration, mining and manufacturing, division of labor, and the union
movement.
5.Understand the connections among natural resources, entrepreneurship, labor, andcapital in an industrial economy.
6.Analyze the emergence of capitalism as a dominant economic pattern and the re­
sponses to it, including Utopianism, Social Democracy, Socialism, and Communism.
7.Describe the emergence of Romanticism in art and literature (e.g., the poetry of
William Blake and William Wordsworth), social criticism (e.g., the novels of CharlesDickens), and the move away from Classicism in Europe.
10.4	 Students analyze patterns of global change in the era of New Imperialism in at 
least two of the following regions or countries: Africa, Southeast Asia, China, 
India, Latin America, and the Philippines. 
1.Describe the rise of industrial economies and their link to imperialism and colonial­
ism (e.g., the role played by national security and strategic advantage; moral issues
raised by the search for national hegemony, Social Darwinism, and the missionary
impulse; material issues such as land, resources, and technology).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 51 ===
44 GRADE TEN 
2.Discuss the locations of the colonial rule of such nations as England, France, Ger­
many, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain, Portugal, and the United States.
3.Explain imperialism from the perspective of the colonizers and the colonized and the
varied immediate and long-term responses by the people under colonial rule.
4.Describe the independence struggles of the colonized regions of the world, including
the roles of leaders, such as Sun Yat-sen in China, and the roles of ideology andreligion.
10.5 Students analyze the causes and course of the First World War. 
1.Analyze the arguments for entering into war presented by leaders from all sides ofthe Great War and the role of political and economic rivalries, ethnic and ideologicalconflicts, domestic discontent and disorder, and propaganda and nationalism in
mobilizing the civilian population in support of “total war.”
2.Examine the principal theaters of battle, major turning points, and the importance of
geographic factors in military decisions and outcomes (e.g., topography, waterways,distance, climate).
3.Explain how the Russian Revolution and the entry of the United States affected the
course and outcome of the war.
4.Understand the nature of the war and its human costs (military and civilian) on all
sides of the conflict, including how colonial peoples contributed to the war effort.
5.Discuss human rights violations and genocide, including the Ottoman government’s
actions against Armenian citizens.
10.6 Students analyze the effects of the First World War. 
1.Analyze the aims and negotiating roles of world leaders, the terms and influence of
the Treaty of Versailles and Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, and the causes and
effects of the United States’s rejection of the League of Nations on world politics.
2.Describe the effects of the war and resulting peace treaties on population movement,
the international economy, and shifts in the geographic and political borders ofEurope and the Middle East.
3.Understand the widespread disillusionment with prewar institutions, authorities,
and values that resulted in a void that was later filled by totalitarians.
4.Discuss the influence of World War I on literature, art, and intellectual life in the
West (e.g., Pablo Picasso, the “lost generation” of Gertrude Stein, ErnestHemingway).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 52 ===
GRADE TEN 45 
10.7	 Students analyze the rise of totalitarian governments after World War I. 
1.Understand the causes and consequences of the Russian Revolution, including
Lenin’s use of totalitarian means to seize and maintain control (e.g., the Gulag).
2.Trace Stalin’s rise to power in the Soviet Union and the connection between economic
policies, political policies, the absence of a free press, and systematic violations ofhuman rights (e.g., the Terror Famine in Ukraine).
3.Analyze the rise, aggression, and human costs of totalitarian regimes (Fascist and
Communist) in Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union, noting especially their common
and dissimilar traits.
10.8	 Students analyze the causes and consequences of World War II. 
1.Compare the German, Italian, and Japanese drives for empire in the 1930s, includingthe 1937 Rape of Nanking, other atrocities in China, and the Stalin-Hitler Pact of 1939.
2.Understand the role of appeasement, nonintervention (isolationism), and the domes­tic distractions in Europe and the United States prior to the outbreak of World War II.
3.Identify and locate the Allied and Axis powers on a map and discuss the major
turning points of the war, the principal theaters of conflict, key strategic decisions,
and the resulting war conferences and political resolutions, with emphasis on theimportance of geographic factors.
4.Describe the political, diplomatic, and military leaders during the war (e.g., Winston
Churchill, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Emperor Hirohito, Adolf Hitler, Benito
Mussolini, Joseph Stalin, Douglas MacArthur, Dwight Eisenhower).
5.Analyze the Nazi policy of pursuing racial purity, especially against the EuropeanJews; its transformation into the Final Solution; and the Holocaust that resulted in the
murder of six million Jewish civilians.
6.Discuss the human costs of the war, with particular attention to the civilian and
military losses in Russia, Germany, Britain, the United States, China, and Japan.
10.9	 Students analyze the international developments in the post–World War II 
world. 
1.Compare the economic and military power shifts caused by the war, including theYalta Pact, the development of nuclear weapons, Soviet control over Eastern Euro­
pean nations, and the economic recoveries of Germany and Japan.
2.Analyze the causes of the Cold War, with the free world on one side and Soviet client
states on the other, including competition for influence in such places as Egypt, theCongo, Vietnam, and Chile.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 53 ===
GRADE  TEN 
3.Understand the importance of the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, which
established the pattern for America’s postwar policy of supplying economic and
military aid to prevent the spread of Communism and the resulting economic and
political competition in arenas such as Southeast Asia (i.e., the Korean War, VietnamWar), Cuba, and Africa.
4.Analyze the Chinese Civil War, the rise of Mao Tse-tung, and the subsequent political
and economic upheavals in China (e.g., the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolu­
tion, and the Tiananmen Square uprising).
5.Describe the uprisings in Poland (1956), Hungary (1956), and Czechoslovakia (1968)and those countries’ resurgence in the 1970s and 1980s as people in Soviet satellites
sought freedom from Soviet control.
6.Understand how the forces of nationalism developed in the Middle East, how the
Holocaust affected world opinion regarding the need for a Jewish state, and thesignificance and effects of the location and establishment of Israel on world affairs.
7.Analyze the reasons for the collapse of the Soviet Union, including the weakness of
the command economy, burdens of military commitments, and growing resistance to
Soviet rule by dissidents in satellite states and the non-Russian Soviet republics.
8.Discuss the establishment and work of the United Nations and the purposes andfunctions of the Warsaw Pact, SEATO, NATO, and the Organization of American
States.
10.10	 Students analyze instances of nation-building in the contemporary world in at 
least two of the following regions or countries: the Middle East, Africa, Mexico 
and other parts of Latin America, and China. 
1.Understand the challenges in the regions, including their geopolitical, cultural,
military, and economic significance and the international relationships in which theyare involved.
2.Describe the recent history of the regions, including political divisions and systems,
key leaders, religious issues, natural features, resources, and population patterns.
3.Discuss the important trends in the regions today and whether they appear to serve
the cause of individual freedom and democracy.
10.11	 Students analyze the integration of countries into the world economy and the 
information, technological, and communications revolutions (e.g., television, 
satellites, computers). 
46 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 54 ===
47
Grade Eleven 
United States History and Geography: 
Continuity and Change in the Twentieth Century 
Students in grade eleven study the major turning points in American history in the 
twentieth century. Following a review of the nation’s beginnings and the impact of the Enlightenment on U.S. democratic ideals, students build upon the tenth grade study of global industrialization to understand the emergence and impact of new technology and a corporate economy, including the social and cultural effects. They trace the change in the ethnic composition of American society; the movement toward equal rights for racial minorities and women; and the role of the United States as a major world power. An emphasis is placed on the expanding role of the federal government and federal courts as well as the continuing tension between the individual and the state. Students consider the major social problems of our time and trace their causes in historical events. They learn that the United States has served as a model for other nations and that the rights and freedoms we enjoy are not accidents, but the results of a defined set of political principles that are not always basic to citizens of other countries. Students understand that our rights under the U.S. Constitution are a precious inherit­ance that depends on an educated citizenry for their preservation and protection. 
11.1	 Students analyze the significant events in the founding of the nation and its 
attempts to realize the philosophy of government described in the Declaration 
of Independence. 
1.Describe the Enlightenment and the rise of democratic ideas as the context in which
the nation was founded.
2.Analyze the ideological origins of the American Revolution, the Founding Fathers’philosophy of divinely bestowed unalienable natural rights, the debates on the
drafting and ratification of the Constitution, and the addition of the Bill of Rights.
3.Understand the history of the Constitution after 1787 with emphasis on federal
versus state authority and growing democratization.
4.Examine the effects of the Civil War and Reconstruction and of the industrial revolu­tion, including demographic shifts and the emergence in the late nineteenth century
of the United States as a world power.
47 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 55 ===
48 GRADE ELEVEN 
11.2	 Students analyze the relationship among the rise of industrialization, large-
scale rural-to-urban migration, and massive immigration from Southern and 
Eastern Europe. 
1.Know the effects of industrialization on living and working conditions, including the
portrayal of working conditions and food safety in Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle.
2.Describe the changing landscape, including the growth of cities linked by industryand trade, and the development of cities divided according to race, ethnicity, and
class.
3.Trace the effect of the Americanization movement.
4.Analyze the effect of urban political machines and responses to them by immigrants
and middle-class reformers.
5.Discuss corporate mergers that produced trusts and cartels and the economic andpolitical policies of industrial leaders.
6.Trace the economic development of the United States and its emergence as a major
industrial power, including its gains from trade and the advantages of its physical
geography.
7.Analyze the similarities and differences between the ideologies of Social Darwinism
and Social Gospel (e.g., using biographies of William Graham Sumner, Billy Sunday,
Dwight L. Moody).
8.Examine the effect of political programs and activities of Populists.
9.Understand the effect of political programs and activities of the Progressives (e.g.,federal regulation of railroad transport, Children’s Bureau, the Sixteenth Amend­
ment, Theodore Roosevelt, Hiram Johnson).
11.3	 Students analyze the role religion played in the founding of America, its 
lasting moral, social, and political impacts, and issues regarding religious 
liberty. 
1.Describe the contributions of various religious groups to American civic principles
and social reform movements (e.g., civil and human rights, individual responsibility
and the work ethic, antimonarchy and self-rule, worker protection, family-centeredcommunities).
2.Analyze the great religious revivals and the leaders involved in them, including the
First Great Awakening, the Second Great Awakening, the Civil War revivals, the
Social Gospel Movement, the rise of Christian liberal theology in the nineteenthcentury, the impact of the Second Vatican Council, and the rise of Christian funda­
mentalism in current times.
3.Cite incidences of religious intolerance in the United States (e.g., persecution of
Mormons, anti-Catholic sentiment, anti-Semitism).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 56 ===
GRADE ELEVEN 49 
4.Discuss the expanding religious pluralism in the United States and California that
resulted from large-scale immigration in the twentieth century.
5.Describe the principles of religious liberty found in the Establishment and Free
Exercise clauses of the First Amendment, including the debate on the issue of separa­
tion of church and state.
11.4	 Students trace the rise of the United States to its role as a world power in the 
twentieth century. 
1.List the purpose and the effects of the Open Door policy.
2.Describe the Spanish-American War and U.S. expansion in the South Pacific.
3.Discuss America’s role in the Panama Revolution and the building of the PanamaCanal.
4.Explain Theodore Roosevelt’s Big Stick diplomacy, William Taft’s Dollar Diplomacy,
and Woodrow Wilson’s Moral Diplomacy, drawing on relevant speeches.
5.Analyze the political, economic, and social ramifications of World War I on the home
front.
6.Trace the declining role of Great Britain and the expanding role of the United States
in world affairs after World War II.
11.5	 Students analyze the major political, social, economic, technological, and 
cultural developments of the 1920s. 
1.Discuss the policies of Presidents Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert
Hoover.
2.Analyze the international and domestic events, interests, and philosophies thatprompted attacks on civil liberties, including the Palmer Raids, Marcus Garvey’s
“back-to-Africa” movement, the Ku Klux Klan, and immigration quotas and the
responses of organizations such as the American Civil Liberties Union, the NationalAssociation for the Advancement of Colored People, and the Anti-Defamation
League to those attacks.
3.Examine the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the
Volstead Act (Prohibition).
4.Analyze the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment and the changing role of womenin society.
5.Describe the Harlem Renaissance and new trends in literature, music, and art, with
special attention to the work of writers (e.g., Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes).
6.Trace the growth and effects of radio and movies and their role in the worldwide
diffusion of popular culture.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 57 ===
50 GRADE ELEVEN 
7.Discuss the rise of mass production techniques, the growth of cities, the impact of
new technologies (e.g., the automobile, electricity), and the resulting prosperity and
effect on the American landscape.
11.6	 Students analyze the different explanations for the Great Depression and how 
the New Deal fundamentally changed the role of the federal government. 
1.Describe the monetary issues of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
that gave rise to the establishment of the Federal Reserve and the weaknesses in keysectors of the economy in the late 1920s.
2.Understand the explanations of the principal causes of the Great Depression and the
steps taken by the Federal Reserve, Congress, and Presidents Herbert Hoover and
Franklin Delano Roosevelt to combat the economic crisis.
3.Discuss the human toll of the Depression, natural disasters, and unwise agriculturalpractices and their effects on the depopulation of rural regions and on political
movements of the left and right, with particular attention to the Dust Bowl refugees
and their social and economic impacts in California.
4.Analyze the effects of and the controversies arising from New Deal economic poli­cies and the expanded role of the federal government in society and the economy
since the 1930s (e.g., Works Progress Administration, Social Security, National Labor
Relations Board, farm programs, regional development policies, and energy devel­
opment projects such as the Tennessee Valley Authority, California Central Valley
Project, and Bonneville Dam).
5.Trace the advances and retreats of organized labor, from the creation of the Ameri­can Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations to current
issues of a postindustrial, multinational economy, including the United Farm Work­
ers in California.
11.7	 Students analyze America’s participation in World War II. 
1.Examine the origins of American involvement in the war, with an emphasis on the
events that precipitated the attack on Pearl Harbor.
2.Explain U.S. and Allied wartime strategy, including the major battles of Midway,
Normandy, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and the Battle of the Bulge.
3.Identify the roles and sacrifices of individual American soldiers, as well as theunique contributions of the special fighting forces (e.g., the Tuskegee Airmen, the
442nd Regimental Combat team, the Navajo Code Talkers).
4.Analyze Roosevelt’s foreign policy during World War II (e.g., Four Freedoms
speech).
5.Discuss the constitutional issues and impact of events on the U.S. home front, in­cluding the internment of Japanese Americans (e.g., Fred Korematsu  v. United States of
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 58 ===
GRADE ELEVEN 51 
America ) and the restrictions on German and Italian resident aliens; the response of 
the administration to Hitler’s atrocities against Jews and other groups; the roles of 
women in military production; and the roles and growing political demands of 
African Americans. 
6.Describe major developments in aviation, weaponry, communication, and medicineand the war’s impact on the location of American industry and use of resources.
7.Discuss the decision to drop atomic bombs and the consequences of the decision
(Hiroshima and Nagasaki).
8.Analyze the effect of massive aid given to Western Europe under the Marshall Plan to
rebuild itself after the war and the importance of a rebuilt Europe to the U.S.economy.
11.8	 Students analyze the economic boom and social transformation of post–World 
War II America. 
1.Trace the growth of service sector, white collar, and professional sector jobs in busi­
ness and government.
2.Describe the significance of Mexican immigration and its relationship to the agricul­
tural economy, especially in California.
3.Examine Truman’s labor policy and congressional reaction to it.
4.Analyze new federal government spending on defense, welfare, interest on the
national debt, and federal and state spending on education, including the California
Master Plan.
5.Describe the increased powers of the presidency in response to the Great Depression,World War II, and the Cold War.
6.Discuss the diverse environmental regions of North America, their relationship to
local economies, and the origins and prospects of environmental problems in those
regions.
7.Describe the effects on society and the economy of technological developments since1945, including the computer revolution, changes in communication, advances in
medicine, and improvements in agricultural technology.
8.Discuss forms of popular culture, with emphasis on their origins and geographic
diffusion (e.g., jazz and other forms of popular music, professional sports, architec­tural and artistic styles).
11.9	 Students analyze U.S. foreign policy since World War II. 
1.Discuss the establishment of the United Nations and International Declaration ofHuman Rights, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and General Agreementon Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and their importance in shaping modern Europe and
maintaining peace and international order.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 59 ===
52 GRADE ELEVEN 
2.Understand the role of military alliances, including NATO and SEATO, in deterring
communist aggression and maintaining security during the Cold War.
3.Trace the origins and geopolitical consequences (foreign and domestic) of the Cold
War and containment policy, including the following:
•	 The era of McCarthyism, instances of domestic Communism (e.g., Alger Hiss) and
blacklisting
•	 The Truman Doctrine
•	 The Berlin Blockade
•	 The Korean War
•	 The Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban Missile Crisis
•	 Atomic testing in the American West, the “mutual assured destruction” doctrine,and disarmament policies
•	 The Vietnam War
•	 Latin American policy
4.List the effects of foreign policy on domestic policies and vice versa (e.g., protestsduring the war in Vietnam, the “nuclear freeze” movement).
5.Analyze the role of the Reagan administration and other factors in the victory of theWest in the Cold War.
6.Describe U.S. Middle East policy and its strategic, political, and economic interests,
including those related to the Gulf War.
7.Examine relations between the United States and Mexico in the twentieth century,
including key economic, political, immigration, and environmental issues.
11.10 Students analyze the development of federal civil rights and voting rights. 
1.Explain how demands of African Americans helped produce a stimulus for civilrights, including President Roosevelt’s ban on racial discrimination in defense indus­tries in 1941, and how African Americans’ service in World War II produced a stimu­
lus for President Truman’s decision to end segregation in the armed forces in 1948.
2.Examine and analyze the key events, policies, and court cases in the evolution of civil
rights, including Dred Scott  v. Sandford, Plessy  v. Ferguson , Brown  v. Board of Education,
Regents of the University of California  v. Bakke, and California Proposition 209.
3.Describe the collaboration on legal strategy between African American and white
civil rights lawyers to end racial segregation in higher education.
4.Examine the roles of civil rights advocates (e.g., A. Philip Randolph, Martin Luther
King, Jr., Malcom X, Thurgood Marshall, James Farmer, Rosa Parks), including thesignificance of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail” and “I Have a
Dream” speech.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 60 ===
GRADE ELEVEN 53 
5.Discuss the diffusion of the civil rights movement of African Americans from the
churches of the rural South and the urban North, including the resistance to racial
desegregation in Little Rock and Birmingham, and how the advances influenced the
agendas, strategies, and effectiveness of the quests of American Indians, AsianAmericans, and Hispanic Americans for civil rights and equal opportunities.
6.Analyze the passage and effects of civil rights and voting rights legislation (e.g., 1964
Civil Rights Act, Voting Rights Act of 1965) and the Twenty-Fourth Amendment,
with an emphasis on equality of access to education and to the political process.
7.Analyze the women’s rights movement from the era of Elizabeth Stanton and SusanAnthony and the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the movement launched
in the 1960s, including differing perspectives on the roles of women.
11.11	 Students analyze the major social problems and domestic policy issues in 
contemporary American society. 
1.Discuss the reasons for the nation’s changing immigration policy, with emphasis on
how the Immigration Act of 1965 and successor acts have transformed Americansociety.
2.Discuss the significant domestic policy speeches of Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy,
Johnson, Nixon, Carter, Reagan, Bush, and Clinton (e.g., with regard to education,
civil rights, economic policy, environmental policy).
3.Describe the changing roles of women in society as reflected in the entry of more
women into the labor force and the changing family structure.
4.Explain the constitutional crisis originating from the Watergate scandal.
5.Trace the impact of, need for, and controversies associated with environmental
conservation, expansion of the national park system, and the development of envi­ronmental protection laws, with particular attention to the interaction between
environmental protection advocates and property rights advocates.
6.Analyze the persistence of poverty and how different analyses of this issue influence
welfare reform, health insurance reform, and other social policies.
7.Explain how the federal, state, and local governments have responded to demo­graphic and social changes such as population shifts to the suburbs, racial concentra­
tions in the cities, Frostbelt-to-Sunbelt migration, international migration, decline of
family farms, increases in out-of-wedlock births, and drug abuse.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 61 ===
54 GRADE TWELVE
Grade Twelve 
Principles of American Democracy and Economics
 
Students in grade twelve pursue a deeper understanding of the institutions of American 
government. They compare systems of government in the world today and analyze the history and changing interpretations of the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the current state of the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches of government. An emphasis is placed on analyzing the relationship among federal, state, and local govern­ments, with particular attention paid to important historical documents such as the Federalist Papers . These standards represent the culmination of civic literacy as students 
prepare to vote, participate in community activities, and assume the responsibilities of citizenship. 
In addition to studying government in grade twelve, students will also master funda­
mental economic concepts, applying the tools (graphs, statistics, equations) from other subject areas to the understanding of operations and institutions of economic systems. Studied in a historic context are the basic economic principles of micro- and macroeco­nomics, international economics, comparative economic systems, measurement, and methods. 
Principles of American Democracy 
12.1	 Students explain the fundamental principles and moral values of American 
democracy as expressed in the U.S. Constitution and other essential documents 
of American democracy. 
1.Analyze the influence of ancient Greek, Roman, English, and leading European
political thinkers such as John Locke, Charles-Louis Montesquieu, NiccolòMachiavelli, and William Blackstone on the development of American government.
2.Discuss the character of American democracy and its promise and perils as articu­
lated by Alexis de Tocqueville.
3.Explain how the U.S. Constitution reflects a balance between the classical republican
concern with promotion of the public good and the classical liberal concern withprotecting individual rights; and discuss how the basic premises of liberal constitu­
tionalism and democracy are joined in the Declaration of Independence as “self­
evident truths.”
54 
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 62 ===
GRADE TWELVE 55 
4.Explain how the Founding Fathers’ realistic view of human nature led directly to the
establishment of a constitutional system that limited the power of the governors and
the governed as articulated in the Federalist Papers.
5.Describe the systems of separated and shared powers, the role of organized interests
(Federalist Paper Number 10 ), checks and balances ( Federalist Paper Number 51 ), the
importance of an independent judiciary ( Federalist Paper Number 78 ), enumerated
powers, rule of law, federalism, and civilian control of the military.
6.Understand that the Bill of Rights limits the powers of the federal government andstate governments.
12.2	 Students evaluate and take and defend positions on the scope and limits of 
rights and obligations as democratic citizens, the relationships among them, 
and how they are secured. 
1.Discuss the meaning and importance of each of the rights guaranteed under the Bill
of Rights and how each is secured (e.g., freedom of religion, speech, press, assembly,petition, privacy).
2.Explain how economic rights are secured and their importance to the individual and
to society (e.g., the right to acquire, use, transfer, and dispose of property; right to
choose one’s work; right to join or not join labor unions; copyright and patent).
3.Discuss the individual’s legal obligations to obey the law, serve as a juror, and pay
taxes.
4.Understand the obligations of civic-mindedness, including voting, being informed on
civic issues, volunteering and performing public service, and serving in the militaryor alternative service.
5.Describe the reciprocity between rights and obligations; that is, why enjoyment of
one’s rights entails respect for the rights of others.
6.Explain how one becomes a citizen of the United States, including the process of
naturalization (e.g., literacy, language, and other requirements).
12.3	 Students evaluate and take and defend positions on what the fundamental 
values and principles of civil society are (i.e., the autonomous sphere of volun­
tary personal, social, and economic relations that are not part of government), 
their interdependence, and the meaning and importance of those values and principles for a free society. 
1.Explain how civil society provides opportunities for individuals to associate for
social, cultural, religious, economic, and political purposes.
2.Explain how civil society makes it possible for people, individually or in association
with others, to bring their influence to bear on government in ways other than voting
and elections.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 63 ===
56 GRADE TWELVE 
3.Discuss the historical role of religion and religious diversity.
4.Compare the relationship of government and civil society in constitutional democra­
cies to the relationship of government and civil society in authoritarian and totalitar­
ian regimes.
12.4	 Students analyze the unique roles and responsibilities of the three branches of 
government as established by the U.S. Constitution. 
1.Discuss Article I of the Constitution as it relates to the legislative branch, including
eligibility for office and lengths of terms of representatives and senators; election tooffice; the roles of the House and Senate in impeachment proceedings; the role of the
vice president; the enumerated legislative powers; and the process by which a bill
becomes a law.
2.Explain the process through which the Constitution can be amended.
3.Identify their current representatives in the legislative branch of the national govern­ment.
4.Discuss Article II of the Constitution as it relates to the executive branch, including
eligibility for office and length of term, election to and removal from office, the oath
of office, and the enumerated executive powers.
5.Discuss Article III of the Constitution as it relates to judicial power, including the
length of terms of judges and the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
6.Explain the processes of selection and confirmation of Supreme Court justices.
12.5	 Students summarize landmark U.S. Supreme Court interpretations of the 
Constitution and its amendments. 
1.Understand the changing interpretations of the Bill of Rights over time, including
interpretations of the basic freedoms (religion, speech, press, petition, and assembly)articulated in the First Amendment and the due process and equal-protection-of-the-
law clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment.
2.Analyze judicial activism and judicial restraint and the effects of each policy over the
decades (e.g., the Warren and Rehnquist courts).
3.Evaluate the effects of the Court’s interpretations of the Constitution in Marbury  v.
Madison, 
McCulloch  v. Maryland, and United States  v. Nixon , with emphasis on the
arguments espoused by each side in these cases.
4.Explain the controversies that have resulted over changing interpretations of civilrights, including those in Plessy  v. Ferguson , Brown  v. Board of Education, Miranda  v.
Arizona, Regents of the University of California  v. Bakke, Adarand Constructors, Inc. v.
Pena,  and 
United States  v. Virginia (VMI).
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 64 ===
GRADE TWELVE 57 
12.6	 Students evaluate issues regarding campaigns for national, state, and local 
elective offices. 
1.Analyze the origin, development, and role of political parties, noting those occasional
periods in which there was only one major party or were more than two major
parties.
2.Discuss the history of the nomination process for presidential candidates and the
increasing importance of primaries in general elections.
3.Evaluate the roles of polls, campaign advertising, and the controversies over cam­paign funding.
4.Describe the means that citizens use to participate in the political process (e.g., vot­
ing, campaigning, lobbying, filing a legal challenge, demonstrating, petitioning,
picketing, running for political office).
5.Discuss the features of direct democracy in numerous states (e.g., the process ofreferendums, recall elections).
6.Analyze trends in voter turnout; the causes and effects of reapportionment and
redistricting, with special attention to spatial districting and the rights of minorities;
and the function of the Electoral College.
12.7	 Students analyze and compare the powers and procedures of the national, 
state, tribal, and local governments. 
1.Explain how conflicts between levels of government and branches of government are
resolved.
2.Identify the major responsibilities and sources of revenue for state and local govern­
ments.
3.Discuss reserved powers and concurrent powers of state governments.
4.Discuss the Ninth and Tenth Amendments and interpretations of the extent of thefederal government’s power.
5.Explain how public policy is formed, including the setting of the public agenda and
implementation of it through regulations and executive orders.
6.Compare the processes of lawmaking at each of the three levels of government,
including the role of lobbying and the media.
7.Identify the organization and jurisdiction of federal, state, and local (e.g., California)courts and the interrelationships among them.
8.Understand the scope of presidential power and decision making through examina­
tion of case studies such as the Cuban Missile Crisis, passage of Great Society legisla­
tion, War Powers Act, Gulf War, and Bosnia.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 65 ===
58 GRADE TWELVE 
12.8	 Students evaluate and take and defend positions on the influence of the media 
on American political life. 
1.Discuss the meaning and importance of a free and responsible press.
2.Describe the roles of broadcast, print, and electronic media, including the Internet, as
means of communication in American politics.
3.Explain how public officials use the media to communicate with the citizenry and to
shape public opinion.
12.9	 Students analyze the origins, characteristics, and development of different 
political systems across time, with emphasis on the quest for political democ­
racy, its advances, and its obstacles. 
1.Explain how the different philosophies and structures of feudalism, mercantilism,
socialism, fascism, communism, monarchies, parliamentary systems, and constitu­tional liberal democracies influence economic policies, social welfare policies, and
human rights practices.
2.Compare the various ways in which power is distributed, shared, and limited in
systems of shared powers and in parliamentary systems, including the influence androle of parliamentary leaders (e.g., William Gladstone, Margaret Thatcher).
3.Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of federal, confederal, and unitary sys­
tems of government.
4.Describe for at least two countries the consequences of conditions that gave rise to
tyrannies during certain periods (e.g., Italy, Japan, Haiti, Nigeria, Cambodia).
5.Identify the forms of illegitimate power that twentieth-century African, Asian, andLatin American dictators used to gain and hold office and the conditions and inter­
ests that supported them.
6.Identify the ideologies, causes, stages, and outcomes of major Mexican, Central
American, and South American revolutions in the nineteenth and twentieth centu­ries.
7.Describe the ideologies that give rise to Communism, methods of maintaining con­
trol, and the movements to overthrow such governments in Czechoslovakia, Hun­
gary, and Poland, including the roles of individuals (e.g., Alexander Solzhenitsyn,Pope John Paul II, Lech Walesa, Vaclav Havel).
8.Identify the successes of relatively new democracies in Africa, Asia, and Latin
America and the ideas, leaders, and general societal conditions that have launched
and sustained, or failed to sustain, them.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 66 ===
GRADE TWELVE 59 
12.10	 Students formulate questions about and defend their analyses of tensions 
within our constitutional democracy and the importance of maintaining a 
balance between the following concepts: majority rule and individual rights; 
liberty and equality; state and national authority in a federal system; civil 
disobedience and the rule of law; freedom of the press and the right to a fair trial; the relationship of religion and government. 
Principles of Economics 
12.1	 Students understand common economic terms and concepts and economic 
reasoning. 
1.Examine the causal relationship between scarcity and the need for choices.
2.Explain opportunity cost and marginal benefit and marginal cost.
3.Identify the difference between monetary and nonmonetary incentives and how
changes in incentives cause changes in behavior.
4.Evaluate the role of private property as an incentive in conserving and improvingscarce resources, including renewable and nonrenewable natural resources.
5.Analyze the role of a market economy in establishing and preserving political andpersonal liberty (e.g., through the works of Adam Smith).
12.2	 Students analyze the elements of America’s market economy in a global 
setting. 
1.Understand the relationship of the concept of incentives to the law of supply and the
relationship of the concept of incentives and substitutes to the law of demand.
2.Discuss the effects of changes in supply and/or demand on the relative scarcity,
price, and quantity of particular products.
3.Explain the roles of property rights, competition, and profit in a market economy.
4.Explain how prices reflect the relative scarcity of goods and services and perform theallocative function in a market economy.
5.Understand the process by which competition among buyers and sellers determines a
market price.
6.Describe the effect of price controls on buyers and sellers.
7.Analyze how domestic and international competition in a market economy affects
goods and services produced and the quality, quantity, and price of those products.
8.Explain the role of profit as the incentive to entrepreneurs in a market economy.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 67 ===
60 GRADE TWELVE 
9.Describe the functions of the financial markets.
10.Discuss the economic principles that guide the location of agricultural production
and industry and the spatial distribution of transportation and retail facilities.
12.3	 Students analyze the influence of the federal government on the American 
economy. 
1.Understand how the role of government in a market economy often includes provid­
ing for national defense, addressing environmental concerns, defining and enforcing
property rights, attempting to make markets more competitive, and protecting con­sumers’ rights.
2.Identify the factors that may cause the costs of government actions to outweigh the
benefits.
3.Describe the aims of government fiscal policies (taxation, borrowing, spending) and
their influence on production, employment, and price levels.
4.Understand the aims and tools of monetary policy and their influence on economicactivity (e.g., the Federal Reserve).
12.4	 Students analyze the elements of the U.S. labor market in a global setting. 
1.Understand the operations of the labor market, including the circumstances sur­rounding the establishment of principal American labor unions, procedures that
unions use to gain benefits for their members, the effects of unionization, the mini­
mum wage, and unemployment insurance.
2.Describe the current economy and labor market, including the types of goods andservices produced, the types of skills workers need, the effects of rapid technological
change, and the impact of international competition.
3.Discuss wage differences among jobs and professions, using the laws of demand and
supply and the concept of productivity.
4.Explain the effects of international mobility of capital and labor on the U.S. economy.
12.5	 Students analyze the aggregate economic behavior of the U.S. economy. 
1.Distinguish between nominal and real data.
2.Define, calculate, and explain the significance of an unemployment rate, the number
of new jobs created monthly, an inflation or deflation rate, and a rate of economic
growth.
3.Distinguish between short-term and long-term interest rates and explain their relativesignificance.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000
=== PAGE 68 ===
GRADE TWELVE 61 
12.6	 Students analyze issues of international trade and explain how the U.S. 
economy affects, and is affected by, economic forces beyond the United 
States’s borders. 
1.Identify the gains in consumption and production efficiency from trade, with empha­
sis on the main products and changing geographic patterns of twentieth-centurytrade among countries in the Western Hemisphere.
2.Compare the reasons for and the effects of trade restrictions during the Great Depres­
sion compared with present-day arguments among labor, business, and political
leaders over the effects of free trade on the economic and social interests of variousgroups of Americans.
3.Understand the changing role of international political borders and territorial sover­
eignty in a global economy.
4.Explain foreign exchange, the manner in which exchange rates are determined, and
the effects of the dollar’s gaining (or losing) value relative to other currencies.
California Department of Education
Created May 18, 2000